mauricio macri, president of argentina, said his country is a trustworthy partner, seeking to make a positive impact on the twenty-first century and committed to implementing a range of measures aimed at enhancing peace, democracy and human rights. raising several regional and global concerns, he said the human rights situation in venezuela is worrisome, adding that argentina will refer allegations of human rights violations to the international criminal court and will, as part of a regional response, host those fleeing venezuela, providing them with needed services. on security matters, he regretted to note that organized crime, cybercrime and terrorism continue to be grave threats that require a collective response. as such, argentina is working with partners on initiatives to combat drug trafficking and stamp out organized crime. highlighting recent terrorist attacks in argentina, he said the government is working to bring to justice those responsible. calling on iran to cooperate with buenos aires to advance the investigation on argentina’s most brutal terrorist attack, he also asked friendly nations to provide needed information about the perpetrators. on fostering a strategic vision of the south atlantic ocean, he raised the question of malvinas*. affirming the legitimate right of argentina to the malvinas islands, south georgia islands and south sandwich islands and the surrounding maritime areas, he reaffirmed the government’s commitment to maintaining a relationship with the united kingdom based on mutual trust. as a strong advocate for multilateralism, he reiterated a commitment to tackling climate change challenges, expressing strong support for the paris agreement and the 2030 agenda. also committed to strengthening global governance, he said argentina will host a conference on south‑south cooperation and will preside over the forthcoming treaty on the non‑proliferation of nuclear weapons review conference. as the international community faces challenges, he pledged argentina’s commitment to sustainable peace.