address by the president of the republic of croatip kolinda grabar-kitarovic at the united nations general assembly 2018 making the united nations relevant to all people: global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies new york, 26 september 2018 your excellencies, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, madam president ( aria fernanda espinosa garces), we live in times of great opportunit es and serious challenges. we are more interconnected than ever, yet the world remains divided in many ways. - - . ¦- ¦ technological developments have enabled our world to truly become a global village. our citizens have become global citizens and are well informed and strongly driven by developments around the world. they expect global leadership in these times of rapid changes and great complexity and look for inspiration in all of us. what is it that people are looking for today? what is it that they expect of a leader? mighty words? they don t really matter much anymore. mighty deeds? yes, indeed. but, foremost, what they expect of us are the simplest of gestures that bring us together, that show our compassion and respect for each other. they expect integrity and inspiration. this summer - of all things - football triggered a global response, uniting us for a moment in our common aspirations for excellence. af er the success of the croatian national team, i have received so many congratulatory letters and messages from all corners of the world. from china, australia and saudi arabia, from france, to trinidad and tobago and nepal. i thank everyone for their kind words. team croatia really played well... they won our hearts , kindly said vishal bagale of india, and shabbir allam wrote in croatian: „svi kao jedno!" -,/ e're all like one!" gilberto castillo of colombia pointed out: "(final) muy merecida para un pais que se supera como gran ejemplo, despues de las duras situaciones historicas vividas. todo un ejemplo a seguir . i :y! opshori nondona, a 14 year old girl from dhaka, bangladesh, was especially persistent in getting her message through: this year, the whole world has recogniz d a small beautiful country - cro tia - through the passion and the power of football. now the world knows how powerful a small beautiful nation can b . this is just a fraction of sud 'mess ges and what most of tnem had in common, what i could read through each of themc s that croatia - a country not big in the size of its t rritory or the number of its population or its economic means - has thus become a metaphor for all of these kind peopl , of what a country can do to inspire others and to arrive on top of the world, winning the earts of people worldwide, and rousing enthusiasm that e ch of t eir countries can do the same. the value of a nation is not measured by its size, underlined bernard stem of france. and, indeed, to excel you don t need physical size; you need heart and persistence, and above all, you need to share a vision and to work together to make it happen. it is not the size of one's territory that matters; it is the size and quality of ideas. magnitude is not measured only in volume, but even more in determination to reach the goal. individual players might have shown gr at skill and technique in the field, but the reason that they triumphed was because they played together as a team. excellencies, the united nations is a place where we must show our willingness to act together and play together as a team. our adversaries are many: poverty, hunger, terrorism, extremism and instability, lack of education, gender inequali y and exclusion of women in many societies, environmental hazards, endangered security and trampled human dignity. we - the leaders - should think of ourselves as a team that needs to work together, to take advantage of our strengths and to 2 ' ¦ i' t address our weaknesses in order to make our world a better place and to inspire excellence globally. we should lea not only in managing crises and solving problems, but in spreading hop and optimism as w ll. we must demonstrate our humanity, solidarity and. 'compassion. in doing so we must, above all elsey respect eadi' othen respect is'the most 'valuable 'asset that we have in interpersonal and international relations. it is our responsibility as un member states to maintain the relevance, the effectiveness, and the efficiency of our organization and to be up-tothe-task for whatever challenge that may arise. however, raising awareness on the most pressing issues is not enough. we must also push for the adoption of the necessary instruments and frameworks and, most of all, secure their implementation. without such an approach this podium will remain merely a self-serving global stage. just words without deeds. throughout the years, we have learned, often the hard way, that governments and international organizations alike have their limits. this has also taught us of the value and importance of inclusiveness and of the important role that the private sector, academia, civil society and brilliant individuals can have in many ifferent fields. croatia has many a luka modric, and not only in sports. our people excel in so many areas: marin soljacic who is a modern day nikola tesla and develops a wireless transfer of energy; iva tolic with her breakthrough work in molecular cell biology; ivan mrvos, developer of smart city furniture for the cities of future; mate rimac with his electric cars, to name just a few among the countless others. let us push formal limits of our organizations away from us! let us embrace talent that is abundant around us! let us inspire through science and innovation, through our brilliant individuals at home and in our well established, hardworking diaspora around the world. let us inspire through our dedicated and tireless work in the united nations. deeds, not words. inclusion, not exclusion or isolation. empowerment. motivation. those are all keys to success. .we are the global village, out ore' often tftan nofe ...we tend to miss the opportunity to bring the global agenda to our homes, to'otierco munities and our families. likewise, we forget to include our homes, communities and families on the global agenda. it takes great tragedi s caused by catastrophes, global cri es, wars and climate change, to remind us of what we ll s an o lose. in today s world, such an approach embodied in multilateralism is under ever-increasing strain. this is of particular concern since the most important issues for the mankind cannot be resolved by any state singlehandedly, or in isolation. ultilateralism is indispensable, but i would agree with those who call for changes in the multilateral system. we should not be complacent, and we need to rethink ecades old mechanisms and instruments in order to adapt them to the modern times and contemporary needs. excellencies, as we celebrate two very important anniversaries this year - 70 years of the universal declaration of human rights and 25 years of the vienna declaration and program of action - it is a fitting occasion to remember that respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law has always been a precondition for long-term stability, peace and development. we should not forget the 70th anniversary of the convention on the preven ion and punishment of the crime of genocide either. we must learn from the tragedies of srebrenica and rwanda, a shame for united nations as described by the great secretary-general kofi annan, to whom i pay a special tribute. these darkest hours must never be forgotten. 4 ladies and gentlemen this year croatia marked its fifth year of membership in th european union. croatia is a tell ng example of the transformative force of the eu memb rship, of the benefits: 'of--accession 'to the area where p ace, freedom/ human dignity and prosperity are standards, not mereide lsr for these reasons, among others;; oatia strongly supports further eu enlargement to our south-eastern neighborhood. r solving all outstanding l gacies of war, while constructively engaging in regional cooperation and good neighborly relations is essential. within this framewor we will continue to focus especially on th rights of minorities, missing persons, war crimes jurisdiction, victims of war, and domestic processing of war crimes. good and mutually beneficial neighborly relations depend on a large egree on the words co ing from across the border. for inflammatory and revisionist rhetoric, spurr d by the need for domestic political needs, takes just a moment to be spoken; however, to repair the damag cause by t k s much, much longer. in bosnia and herzegovina, our closest neighbor and a country of utmost importance for croatia, we see a risk of legal uncertainty and political and institutional instability after the upcoming october elections, due to the failure to amend the electoral framework so that it fully respects the rights and equality of the three constituent peoples bosniaks, croats and serbs - in line with the constitutional court decision on the legitimate and proportionate representation of constituent peoples at all levels of government, including the presidency. although the belgrade-pristina dialog is for the two sides to resolve, we should b cautious and extremely careful when it comes to proposals with potential regional implications, most notably the ideas regarding territorial (ex)changes: otherwise, we may (re)open the pandora s box 5 of potential new territorial claims potentially provo ing serious instability and security threats. there are inspiring developments demonstrating brave leadership as well. we warmly welcome the signing of th agreement on the name issue'whietr has been rec ntly r ached betw en skopje and thens an ¦hope that the referendum this synday ill represent ¦a crucial impetusfor th ooiystey s successful continuation of its euro-atlanticrintegraf on. ladies and gentlemen, by a opting the 2030 agen a, along with the historic paris agreement on climate change, and th addis ababa action agenda, we have sent a powerful message that there is hope for a brighter future. however, to succeed in our endeavors, we need to mobilize all partners to work together. this way we can chieve social progress, protect the environm nt, create economic growth an build a more just, stable and peac ful world. runaway climate change is one of the most serious threats that w regularly witness - from heat waves and forest fires, no longer contained to california or m diterran an, but also in places such as scandinavia to historic typhoons in japan or in the philippines, and the melting of ice sheets on the planet s poles. no country can shield itself from the negative ffect of climate change. croatia is no exception to that. with over one thousand islands, islets and reefs and a rich history of mediterranean h ritage, implementing goals of the 2030 agenda now is crucial for croatia s future. all over the world, croatia included, we are recording changes in sea temperature and have witnessed unprecedented and irreversible changes in ecosystems. in croatia's beautiful adriatic sea, one of the cleanest in the world, we have already registered more than 20 new 6 species of tropical fish, some of them extremely invasive that can irreparably shif the environmental balance. soon we may be exposed to th danger of rising sea levels, which is already a question of exist nce for many small islands around the world. it is estimated that the sea level irtthe' adriatic-will rise by almost half a meter y 2100; ub'merging' arts' pf world.- heritage places and treasures like split, trogir or dubrovnik. thisas hy climate action is not an abstract issue, but a serio s mat er r quiring our constant and undivided attention. one of the most important climate action and sustainable development issues for croatia is rev rsing demographic trends on our isl nds. they are turning into places where schools are without children, and churches record funerals rather than baptisms and weddings. and yet, the problems that many of these islands face are common globally. we ne d to improve affordable transportation and connections between the islands and the mainland. we need to resolv water supply and provide dean water and sanitation. we need to invest in education, technology, science and innovation so that societies and families will once gain flourish on the islands. blue growth could be a solution. it is a long-term strategy to support sustain ble growth in the marine and maritime sectors as a whole. s as are driv rs of the economy and have great potential for innov tion and growth, set to grow at twice the rate of the mainstream economy by 2030. growth is especially welcome in a number of areas, such as: sustainable coastal tourism, new health benefits, better connectivity of islands, sustainable blue growth and jobs, marine biotechnology, renewable energy, managing maritime ecological threats and preserving eco¬ systems and biodiversity, but also improving safety and security in terms of maritime traffic and cross-border maritime pollution. 7 i ;r . ? 't one of the issues that i would like to emphasize today in particular is marine litter, a problem of increasing concern that threatens marine life in all the world s oceans, impacting more than 600 marine species. the croatian coastal areas are severely affected by poorly managed waste from our southern adriatic neighbors. -we ' ave t addres the rising probiemf of plastic pollution iir our..seas and oceans rgently if we "want to leave a liveable world to futuregenerations. plastic ebris - and each year around eight million tons of it ends up in our oceans and seas - is particularly worrying because it is resistant to environmental breakdown. plastic pollution does not only impact sea life, it also carries toxic pollutants into the food chain with us humans on top of it. we can solve this problem and we can start by educating and engaging everyone in a conversation to rethink plastic, by challenging societ 's perception that this indestructible substance can be treated as disposable . particular attention should be given to the ocean cleanup project in this regard. it is designing and developing the first feasible method to rid the world's oceans of plastic and its first mission to remove 50% of the great pacific garbage patch in just five years started several weeks ago. in the media they have called it pac man, referring to a popular old videogame. the young man behind the invention is a brilliant scientist of croatian origin living in the netherlands bojan slat, and he well deserves to be given credit here today, beneath the un logo, which clearly shows our oceans. my country is already actively preparing for the fulfillment of its obligations un er the paris agreement excellencies, this was the year of un reforms in more ways than one; not only through results achieved in the pivotal sectors of peace and security, 8 development and un management but also in the transformational nature of our mutual efforts to make our organization fit for the 21st century. the world has changed profoundly since 1945 an the birth of the un. in our reforms it is essential that we strike the right balance between the maintenance of the basic framework based on the un charter and.the flexibility required by new realities and conte porary needs. in pursuing un' 'reforms : los agenda. ight of the 2030 we need a u capable of coping with unceasing ch ng s and growing challenges in the international arena, be it n the field of regional security, conflict management, threats to the environment, human rights, or frontline technologies that transform profoundly the fields of labor and disarmament ali e. i use this opportunity to highly commend the secretary-general and his team for their tireless reform efforts. ther is still a lot of work ahead of us, but we shoul e cont nt with the results an trajectories establishe in 2018. ladi s and gentlemen, if we want to mov forward, and leave no one behind; if we truly strive to make the un more r levant and, in doing so, more effective, we also nee to realize that the un is and should e much more than just ew york, geneva, vienna, nairobi, or any conference location. multilateralism starts from our own homes and in our own minds. it must not be an annual event. it needs to be our daily routine, a way of doing business in the world. e erything that we want to achieve globally, everything that we have agreed so far under this dome, will be easier to accomplish with the understanding and support of our citizens. 9 in order to face all the adversities and adversaries th t i mention in my spe ch, both as deliver d in the more complete, written version that you have received, we must show determination to take on the risk of decision-making. we must open ourselves to new ideas. and we must show emotion, empathy and, above all, enthusiasm. enthusiasm is contagious! • ' as nelson mandefe (fyiadf ), whose centenary e celebrated two days ago, said, it always seems impossible until it done thank you. 10