statement by h.e. mr. kairat abdrakhmanov, minister of foreign affairs of the republic of kazakhstan the high-level general debate of the 73rd session of the unga “making the united nations relevant to all people: global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies” new york, 28 september 2018 madam/mr. president, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, as we commemorate this year, the 100th anniversary of the birth of one of the greatest sons of humanity – nelson mandela – i would like to begin my statement with his quote: “it is easy to break down and destroy. the heroes are those who make peace and build.” madam/mr. president, we have approached the 73rd session of the general assembly with a grown number of problems vis-à-vis last year, facing a lack of trust and mutual respect. we find ourselves in a state of a profound world-wide crisis that touches every aspect of the life of each and every person in our interconnected and rapidly accelerating world. millions of people live under a shadow of dreadful wars, such as in syria, yemen and many other corners of the globe. kazakhstan believes that war can never be a lasting solution to any problem. based on this conviction and sharing the belief that the only viable solution to the current crisis in syria is the inclusive and syrian-led political process, we launched the astana process towards strengthening confidencebuilding measures between the conflicting parties in syria. our far-reaching commitment is embodied in the 2016 anti-war manifesto “the world. 21st century”, by kazakhstan’s president nursultan nazarbayev, who stated in that treatise: “the main tool for resolving all disputes between states should be a peaceful dialog and constructive negotiations on the basis of equal responsibility for peace and security, mutual respect and non-interference into domestic affairs.” it is a roadmap for peace, calling for the efficient use of all tools available – from early warning, conflict prevention, diplomacy and mediation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, to sustainable development. !2 ladies and gentlemen, my country has become a net contributor to peace, security and stability, economic and social development - not only in our region, but far beyond. we have carefully preserved peace and harmony in our multi-ethnic and multi-religious society, stressing and enforcing the equality and dignity of every citizen. we have achieved this while also creating an efficient economic model – our economy has grown more than 20 times from the day my country emerged as an independent state. looking forward, kazakhstan has a clear vision for its future development. by 2050 we seek to become one of the top thirty most advanced economies in the world, meeting the highest global standards in terms of economic performance and transparent governance, especially those of the oecd. as a new model of economic growth, president nazarbayev in his annual address earlier this year announced the new opportunities under the fourth industrial revolution. it outlines the path for our country to achieve those ambitious goals. this new road map focuses on industrialisation, further development of our resource potential, the use of smart technologies as a chance for a breakthrough in the development of the agricultural industry, increasing the efficiency of transport and logistics infrastructure, “reloading” the financial sector and the strengthening of human capital as the basis of modernisation. on a global level president nazarbayev has put forward the g-global initiative – a communication and it platform to ensure wide and inclusive dialog on finding common solution for global economic and financial shortcomings. the platform unites prominent international scientists, entrepreneurs, politicians. madam/mr. president, in the regional context we are committed to further extending our partnership among central asian countries and to enhancing our common capability to withstand threats and challenges. today in central asia, a "new reality" has been formed. we consider the political, economic and cultural potential of the region as a common resource, the most rational and effective use of which is achievable only in a collective format. our shared goal is creating in our region of central asia and beyond a model for a zone of peace, security, trust, development and cooperation. several features of such a zone are already in place, as exemplified by the council of the turkic speaking states, the international aral sea fund and !3 its last summit, that demonstrated strong political collaboration amongst regional leaders, the nuclear weapons free zone in central asia and other mechanisms. being the first country from the region represented in the un security council, we try to deeper focus to the situation in afghanistan with its full implications and threats in the broader regional context. besides, kazakhstan for many years has been contributing significantly to peace and rehabilitation of this country. we believe that the revival of the country as a prosperous and peaceful neighbor will have a positive impact on overall security in our region. a special role in this process should be played by afghan women. to increase international awareness and support for the needs of afghan women and girls, we hosted the regional conference on empowering women in afghanistan on september 5, 2018 in astana. it was attended by female politicians, parliamentarians, entrepreneurs and civil sector members from afghanistan and central asian nations. the event gave great impetus to strengthening the role of women not only in afghanistan, but in the whole central asian region – helping to improve their lives and to influence their future. new globalization trends imply cross-border threats and challenges, requiring a new paradigm of addressing them. these transnational challenges are specific but common to particular regions, especially conflict-prone ones, and necessitate transit from “country-specific” to “regional” strategy to tackle them. regional strategy becomes effective with “whole-of-system” coordination of un structures’ activities region-wide. as a pilot case we offer the establishment of a un regional hub for sdgs in almaty. the city already hosts over a dozen of un offices with regional, sub-regional and multi-country mandates. this sound un field presence successfully promotes sdgs in our region for years. and i am happy to announce that as a host country, we will provide these offices with a state-of-the-art, fully equipped and furnished building, specifically designed as per un requirements by the end of this year. dear colleagues, as an example of regional cooperation, i would also like to outline the results of the caspian summit held a month ago in the city of aktau in western kazakhstan. we all are extremely satisfied and proud that the longawaited legal status of the caspian sea has been agreed and determined by the five littoral countries. the treaty creates a solid legal basis for further comprehensive interaction between all the caspian states, strengthening regional security and stability, as well as the efficient use of the sea resources. !4 i would like to emphasize that the caspian sea has become an area of peace, harmony, good neighborliness and enhanced international cooperation. ladies and gentlemen, today, the ability to show global leadership and responsibility is challenged by the numerous threats – from spread of weapons – conventional and of mass destruction, as well as terrorism, extremism, organized crime, and all forms of trafficking, to food, water, energy and health insecurities. from violation of the human rights, particularly rights of women, youth and children, degrading human dignity to lack of respect and justice for all. kazakhstan tries its best to stay on the vanguard of tackling these international challenges, as well as seeking innovative solutions for them. we fully support the efforts of the secretary-general to implement his reforms for peace and security architecture, the un development system and management. we will contribute towards improving shared responsibility, transparency and overall coordination of all un organs to achieve these goals. we are engaged in reforming the methods of work of the security council so as to enhance its relevance, transparency, accountability and effective capacity to respond speedily to varying crises. madam/mr. president, kazakhstan stays committed to strengthening peacekeeping with clear and achievable mandates, highly qualified personnel and adequate resources. we will increase our contribution to un peacekeeping operations through innovative forms of partnerships including co-deployment. we will deploy a unit and additional officers to un peacekeeping missions, during this 73rdsession, and expand their number in the future. being fully supportive to the concept of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention and confidence-building president of kazakhstan initiated creating the un regional center for preventive diplomacy for central asia, as well as the conference on interaction and confidence-building measures in asia, which comprises 27 countries, spanning from the middle to far east and south-east asia. my country has proven itself to be a moral leader in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, having renounced the world's fourth largest nuclear arsenal and the world's largest nuclear test site in semipalatinsk. we call upon all other countries to follow our example as nuclear weapons do not ensure either real power or true protection. protection is provided through the trust of the international community. !5 kazakhstan signed the treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons on 2 march 2018, following its engaged participation in the elaboration and adoption of the treaty. now we are processing its ratification. the early entry into force of the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty remains a key goal for us. our country, one of the most impacted by the harmful consequences of nuclear tests, is making great efforts to reach global zero. we therefore sponsored general assembly resolution 64/35 that established the international day against nuclear tests. three weeks ago, member states commemorated the ninth observance of the day, with the un general assembly firmly supporting the urgent and complete end to all nuclear testing. the creation of nuclear weapon free zones remains one of the most effective measures in combating the spread of wmd. with this in mind, president nursultan nazarbayev proposed strengthening the cooperation between nuclear weapons free zones and convening inter-zone conferences on a regular basis. astana proposes hosting the first such meeting. we are also steadfastly advocating for the denuclearization of the korean peninsula and call on all the parties involved to agree on mutually acceptable conditions to keep the negotiation process on. we also support preserving and ensuring the proper implementation of the joint comprehensive plan of action (jcpoa) for iran and the thorough investigation of chemical crimes in syria, and also preventing chemical terrorism. dear colleagues, countering terrorism is of special significance for my country. kazakhstan has ratified 16 of the 19 un instruments on combating terrorism, with measures taken for the early accession to the remaining three treaties. stronger global leadership in fighting terrorism remains crucial. we must do more to address the roots of radicalization using best practices and relevant un instruments. we are actively working under the joint plan of action for implementing the un global counter-terrorism strategy (gcts) in central asia. having contributed 300,000 us dollars, kazakhstan has become the first donor of its third phase, and we thank other donors too. addressing the general assembly in 2015, president nazarbayev put forward several counter-terrorism initiatives: the creation of a global counter-terrorism coalition/network and the adoption of a comprehensive un document on combating terrorism. in this context, our country is offering !6 the code of conduct towards achieving a world free of terrorism, inviting all countries to closely coordinate in the fight against this evil. we commend all our partners for their support. the code singing ceremony was just held earlier this afternoon at a high-level special event with seventy member states having joined the document, to whom we are very grateful. the code remains open for signing by other states and we invite you all to manifest your good will in fighting this disastrous phenomenon. madam/mr. president, our strong conviction is that comprehensive success in the area of “hard security” is impossible without success in achieving the sustainable development goals. we have launched a number of initiatives to implement the sdgs: the renowned international expo 2017 exhibition on the theme of future energy; the post-expo international center for green technologies and investment projects; the annual astana economic forum; the kazaid development agency, the regional hub for excellence in civil service; the regional center for disaster risk reduction, and the antinarcotic central asian regional information coordination center. all of these have many promising prospects for the future. kazakhstan is the world’s largest landlocked country. it also is a part of the biggest landlocked region of central asia and afghanistan, and the farthest away from any ocean. it has made many strides in achieving connectivity and turning what can be termed as “landlockedness” into “landlinkedness”. based on the outcomes of the implementation of almaty program of action and working jointly on the fulfilling of the vienna program of action for lldcs we strive to further expand communications, enhance infrastructure, boost trade and transit, counter climate change, and improve energy efficiency. that was why kazakhstan along with the un office of high representative for lldcs, ldcs and sids hosted 16-17 may 2018 in astana the lldcs ministerial meeting on improving transport connectivity and trade facilitation. the conference increased the visibility for the needs of lldcs on international stage and contributed to mobilizing global support to improve lives of millions of people in geographically disadvantaged countries. we are ready to share our experiences in promoting the goals of our large scale “third modernization” program, geared towards joining the top 30 most developed nations, through innovative development, bold institutional reforms, sound investments and extensive international cooperation and knowledge-sharing. !7 in this context, south-south cooperation is gaining importance for us. together with the un system, and other partners, we will continue to extend assistance to african countries, focusing on resolving conflicts, strengthening political stability and security, and promoting sustainable peace and development. with undp, our first successful experience was a $2 million project, entitled “africa – kazakhstan partnership for the sdgs”, as well as biogas projects for sids with un escap. the recent establishment of the islamic organization for food security in astana will contribute to humanitarian assistance effort through the creation of food reserves. also, a new initiative of oic cooperation in the area of science and technologies will serve the purpose of narrowing the digital and it gap between the developed and developing countries. madam/mr. president, kazakhstan’s hallmarks, among many others, are pluralism, and interfaith accord. they are promoted through an unprecedented dialog platform, the triennial congress of leaders of world and traditional religions in astana. its “added value” is it brings together religious and political leaders, international organizations, civil society and turns the paradigm of conflict and clash of cultures and religions into a unique model of tolerance and harmony. president nazarbayev has unveiled a new program of spiritual modernization of the kazakh society “rukhani zhangyru (spiritual enlightenment)”, blending tradition with contemporary elements. i can convey the essence of the initiative in his words: “dreaming of our great future, we should not forget about our worthy past” (мечтая о нашем великом будущем, не следует забывать и о нашем достойном прошлом). madam/mr. president, before i conclude, i reiterate that it is only through our collective will and solidarity we can turn this world in crisis into a world of hope and promise. the united nations should stay open and relevant to all people, since it is our common responsibility to leave a strengthened and well used heritage to move towards peaceful, equitable and sustainable society where no one is left behind. in conclusion i want to again refer to the words of nelson mandela – “it is in your hands to create a better world for all who live in it”. we do need to turn our good will and good words into good action. as president of kazakhstan h.e. nursultan nazarbayev clearly stated: “the time to look ahead is now. the time for action is now. the time to show our will is now. the time to make a difference is now” (пришло время смотреть !8 вперед. пришло время браться за дело. пришло время проявить волю. пришло время изменить саму жизнь). i thank you!