•->r r'ff (di'wan of fffie frime (minister state oj kuwoit f'myrmw 1 d« pi farf statement of the state of kuwait delivered by the representative of his highness the amir of the state of kuwait his heighness sheik jaber al mubarak al hamad al sabah prime minister of the state of kuwait before the seventy-third session of the united nations general assembly general debate united nations headquarters - new york wedneesday, 26 september 2018 'diwan of 'fde frme umister state of kuwait ^ ^ madam president, your highnesses & excellencies, mr. secretary-generai, ladies and gentlemen, the peace, mercy and blessings of allah be upon you on behalf of the government and the people of the state of kuwait, it pleases me at the outset, to extend our sincere congratulations to you personally, and your friendly country, the republic of ecuador, on your election as president of the 73"^^ session of the united nations general assembly. i would also like to assure you of our full support, in all what would facilitate your work and the fulfillment of your responsibilities. we are fully confident of your ability to assume this role, and are certain that your experience in international issues will contribute positively to the conduct of the work of this session. i would also like to avail myself of this opportunity to express my country's sincere appreciation for the outstanding efforts exerted by your predecessor. his excellency mr. miroslav lajcak, during his capable and successful presidency of the previous session. in this respect, i would be remiss if i do not pay tribute to the great efforts of his excellency, the secretary-general of the united nations, mr. antonio guterres, in leading this organization, according to a vision and ideas derived from the principles and alms of the united nations charter, centered around the maintenance of international peace and security, while emphasizing our support of his reformative initiatives, particularly those that relate to the peaceful settlement of conflicts, which have promoted the approach of preventatlve diplomacy and moved it from its academic frameworks and limited experimental phases to the plane of systematic application, in accordance with an international plan seeking to harmonize effective reforms that would advance the role that we expect from the united nations. diwan of j'de frime umstcr state of'kuwait ^ ^ madam president, preventing and resolving conflicts by peaceful means, has been and continues to be one of the most important reasons for the establishment of the united nations. after the bioody experiences of the first and second world wars, and despite their unprecedented catastrophic consequences on humanity, those wars were the original motivation to develop a meaningful international system, to protect our present and future generations from the scourge of war. the past seven decades have witnessed historical and concrete roles for the united nations, during which it has developed its working methods and expanded its mandates, to including humanitarian, political, security, developmental, and economic issues in various parts of the world. however, the increased frequency of challenges and the exacerbation of the severity of conflicts, and the risks they pose for international peace and security, have exposed the urgent need to bolster the ability of the united nations, to provide the required response to the challenges our world faces today, such as the spread of the phenomenon of violence, extremism, and terrorism, as well as the dangers of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, in addition to the continuous violations of human rights and the phenomenon of climate change, and other challenges. here, the proposals and plans that the secretary-general has introduced to restructure the secretariat with a view to enhance its effectiveness and increase its efficiency, to ensure that its efforts in ending conflicts are not squandered, come as a preliminary important step to transform the problem of reform, from a hypothesis of discussion to a realistic application. here, we renew our support for this step, which concretizes part of the aspirations of the peoples of the world towards this organization, as a safe haven and the guarantor of a world of peace and stability. madam president, after nine months of non-permanent membership on the security council, for the period 2018-2019, the state of kuwait has become increasingly aware of the importance of reforming the security council to make it more capable of shouldering its responsibilities to face up to the growing challenges of today's world, reflecting the international reality in which we live today, in a manner that would strengthen its credibility and legitimacy, as well as having a diwan of mm 'fue frime umster state of'kuwait permanent arab representation commensurate with the number of arab member states, and the size of their contributions to the various activities of the united nations. since the first day of its non-permanent membership on the councii, the state of kuwait was keen on adhering to an objective approach in dealing with the various issues and fiies iisted on the council's agenda. such an approach comes as a realistic refiection of its foreign policy, based on the respect of the sovereignty and independence of states, and the non-interference in their internal affairs. additionally we believe in the lofty message of the united nations organization seeking to maintain international peace and security. although the security council agenda is replete with middle eastern issues, nonetheless kuwait's involvement with this agenda was not constrained by any cultural, ethnic, political, or geographical considerations through our non-permanent membership on the councii, we have sought to go beyond the routine of participation in the work of the council. therefore we have aimed to broader horizons, with the objective of elevating the rule of international law, with ail of its branches, including respect for human rights, building a better future for the world's population, and totally avoiding selectivity and bias in dealing with the various issues. this trend, based on the charter of the united nations & the diplomatic legacy of the state of kuwait, gives preference to the peaceful solutions and mediation efforts between the parties. this reflects the manner in which we deal with the difficult issues and crises ravaging our world today. the human being and his inherent rights continue to be the pillars of our foreign policy, as based on the directions of his highness, sheik sabah al-ahmad ai-jaber aisabah, the amir of the state of kuwait, who was honored by this esteemed organization as a leader of humanitarian work. madam president, the palestinian question is one of the most important and oldest issues iisted on the agenda of the security council. this year marks the 70*^ anniversary of the issuance of resolution 56 in august 1948, being the first time the councii dealt with this protracted question. although successive resolutions were issued by the united nations security council and general assembly, in addition to the multiple international and regional initiatives diwan of 'fde frm umsur state of'kuwait seeking to lay the foundations of peace in the middle east, israel persists in its intransigence, rejecting and ignoring the resolutions of international legitimacy, and continues its expansionist policies through the establishment of illegal settlements on occupied palestinian territories. this constitutes a gross defiance and blatant rejection to implement resolutions of international legitimacy, the latest of which was resolution 2334 (2016) which demanded the cessation of all israeli illegal settlement practices. furthermore, israel continues desecrating the sanctity of the holy al-aqsa mosque in jerusalem. this is in addition to its abusive violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, by detaining thousands of palestinians in its prisons and detention centers, and its repeated military aggressions in the gaza strip, during which it did not observe the basic principles for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, including during foreign occupation, and did not adhere to the agreed upon international measures set forth in the fourth geneva convention of 1949 concerning the protection of civilians in time of war. out of keenness of the state of kuwait on the full enforcement of security council resolutions, we presented a draft resolution to the security council last may, which demanded from israel, the occupying power, to immediately cease the use of illegitimate force against civilians, and called for international protection to ensure the safety and security of the palestinian civiiian population in the occupied territories. despite the non-adoption of the draft resolution, the state of kuwait shall not spare any effort in support of the legitimate political rights of the palestinian people. this shall continue until the end of the occupation and the attainment of a permanent, just, and comprehensive peace, in accordance with the initiative calling for land for peace, the arab peace initiative, and the implementation of all resolutions relating to international legitimacy, calling for the two state solution, and the establishment of a palestinian state within the borders of the 4^*^ of june of 1967, with east jerusalem as its capital. madam president, the syrian crisis has entered its 8^*^ year, due to the inability of the international community to find a solution, ending its devastating consequences and horrific losses. throughout, the syrian citizen has been the main victim in a conflict which resulted in more than 400,000 people dead. this 'dimn of 'mm 'fde frime (minister state of'kuv/ait ^ ^ is in addition to more than 12 million refugees and displaced persons. the state of kuwait, in cooperation & coordination with the friendly delegation of the kingdom of sweden, has submitted resolution 2041, in regard to the humanitarian situation in syria. the security council's unanimous adoption of this resolution reflects a positive signal of solidarity and unity with respect to putting an end to human suffering, the cessation of hostile acts, and guaranteeing access to humanitarian assistance for those in need within syrian territories in a timely fashion. yet, today, we regret that the resolution was not implemented nor adhered to on the ground. these efforts take place in the context of the humanitarian role pursued by the state of kuwait, in dealing with the deteriorating human conditions in syria, since the start of this crisis. in the course of these efforts, the state of kuwait has hosted 3 international conferences for donors supporting the humanitarian situation in syria. through these conferences, my country has offered voluntary contributions amounting to 1 billion and six hundred million dollars. now here, we renew our principled and unwavering position regarding the syrian crisis. this position rejects any military solution for this crisis, stressing the importance of working to intensify efforts to bring all parties to a direct dialog, in an effort to reach a peaceful settlement according to relevant security council resolutions, especially resolution 2254. the aim is to achieve a political reality on which various components of the syrian people find consensus. this should preserve the unity and independence of syria, in order to achieve the legitimate aspirations of the syrian people, which guarantee bringing to justice those who committed crimes. madam president, the sisterly state of yemen, is going through sensitive historic challenges with serious implications on the political, humanitarian, and economic planes. these are the consequences of the coup perpetrated against the legitimate authority by the houthi group since september 2014. that group has continued to reject the implementation of relevant security council resolutions, as well as international initiatives aiming at achieving a political settlement. that group has also continued its threats to the peace and stability of the region through the launching of ballistic missiles on the sisterly kingdom of saudi arabia. this has endangered the safety of free navigation di'wan of 'fde fritne mimster stateofxuwait through the strait of bab-ai-mandab and the red sea. in this regard, we stress our severe condemnation for such activities, which contravene international law and the international humanitarian law. from this perspective, we renew our full commitment to respecting yemen's sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity. we also reject any interference in yemeni internal affairs, emphasizing our full support for the constitutional legitimacy of yemen. that is the country which was the cradle of arab civilization. we also stress the importance of prioritizing the political solution of the crisis through resorting to the three agreed upon references. these are the initiative of the gulf cooperation council countries, and its implementation mechanism, the outcomes of the comprehensive national dialog, and the relevant security council resolutions, especially resolution 2216. in accordance with the method adhered to by kuwaiti diplomacy, inspired by its preventive character, which is based on mediation & political settlement, my country, in the course of 2016, and for more than 100 days, has hosted political consultations between the yemeni parties, under the auspices of the united nations, it is in such framework that we renew our readiness to host our yemeni brethren for the signing of a final agreement whenever it is achieved by the yemeni parties. in this regard, we stress the continuation of support for the united nations efforts, and for those of the special envoy of the secretary general for yemen, aiming at achieving a peaceful solution for this crisis, guaranteeing the shortening of its duration. madam president, the coup against the legitimacy of yemen, had consequences which played a major role in the deterioration of the humanitarian situation there. such results have caused frightening and unprecedented statistics, whereby the yemeni person continues to suffer and strive for securing his daily sustenance. the state of kuwait has not ignored the needs of the brotherly yemeni population. therefore, kuwait has contributed $350 million, the last portion of which was $250 million, which were pledged at the geneva conference held last april. that amount has been delivered in full to un agencies and their mechanisms engaged in humanitarian activities. 'dimn of mmm frm uimster state of'kuwait the purpose of all this aid has been the amelioration of the severity of the dangerous deterioration of the humanitarian, health and economic standards. but, such deterioration of standards will not be arrested without striving for the restoration of peace and stability in yemen, in order to protect its sovereignty, territorial integrity, and the return of harmony to all population sectors. madam president, the spread of the phenomenon of terrorism and violent extremism in the world, especially in the middle east region, is to be regarded as an unprecedented challenge, which has hit the world system to the core. this has happened through the evolution of the ideology of the secretive and rogue organization, which have used islam as a cover for their destructive intentions. the so called "da'esh" "islamic state in iraq and the levant", a terrorist group which has perpetrated atrocities, including wide spread murder and destruction in various areas of the middle east, has compelled the emergence of an international coalition to fight it. in this regard, the state of kuwait has contributed both material and moral support in accordance with the agreement relating to combating terrorism adopted by the league of arab states, the organization of islamic cooperation and the united nations through the years from 1999-2001. the brotherly iraq has been the first to suffer from the crimes of that terrorist group, yet the collaboration of the international community represented by the security council with the iraqi government has played a role of maximum effectiveness in cleansing the iraqi territory from the geographic positioning of that serious terror cancer. based on our conviction that the peace and security equation in the post-war phase, cannot be achieved except through repairing the destructive effects which are not in consonance with humanitarianism, my country has hosted an international conference which dealt with rebuilding iraq. at that conference, the amount of pledges have exceeded $30 billion, of which the state of kuwait has contributed $2 billion. here we would like to renew our firm position regarding the offering of various types of assistance to iraq in order to enable it to complete the fulfillment of its outstanding obligations provided for by relevant security tlimn of 'fde frm 'minister state of'kuwait vi '' ^ vi'^-'l "" " " ) £.♦ council resolutions, with the aim of aiding iraq to regain its role and position regionally and internationally. and in connection with the same regional planes, and guided by the same principles that call for strengthening the rules of good neighborliness, non-interference in the internal affairs of states, as set forth in the united nations charter, we renew our call to the islamic republic of iran to take serious confidence building measures aimed to establish relations based on cooperation, mutual respect, common interests, in a manner that would lead to guiding the efforts and capabilities towards development and construction. this would reflect the future aspiration of all peoples in the region for a life of peace and security. madam president, in accordance with what we have mentioned earlier, regarding the role which my country has committed itself to pursue, and which is based on according special priority to cases of humanitarian nature, and in response to the tragic situation which the refugees of the rohingya muslim minority of myanmar are facing, the state of kuwait has contributed to the organization of a security council visit to both bangladesh and myanmar. here, the aim was to discuss the crisis of those refugees, to get acquainted with their situation and to assess the steps which have been taken by the authorities of these two countries towards this crisis. this is one of the gravest humanitarian crises which have been witnessed by the world. we shall continue our efforts through our membership on the security council, and in cooperation with all parties concerned with guaranteeing a safe, voluntary, and dignified return of these refugees and the bringing to account of those responsible for the crimes committed against them. madam president, the adoption of the agenda on the goals of the 2030 sustainable development plan is considered one of the most remarkable phases of important success for the united nations. that agenda is an extension of the efforts of the international community which are based on the primary rules emanating from the millennium development goals. such goals have achieved their noble objective which stimulated the un transitioning from the epoch of 8 (dimn of 'ffie fme 'umister state ofkumt defining relative goals in confronting the challenges to a new phase stamped by its comprehensiveness and the search for root solutions. this has been a picture whereby the human being has become its primary objective. it is a phase where our fidelities to international obligations and solidarity on the international level shall be the real leap for attaining the sustainable development goals with the aim of eradicating poverty with all of its manifestations and ensuring that all human beings would attain their equal rights to dignity, education, health, political participation, and the empowerment of the young and of women. this would also confront the effects of climate change in the context of the historic paris agreement. this is because environmental degradation is to be considered one of the main obstacles on the road to attaining these goals, in line with the principle of shared responsibility, taking into account the disparity of responsibilities and burdens of states. furthermore, among the most prominent challenges facing sustainable development is perhaps the issues concerning migrants and refugees. in this regard, we look forward to the international conference on migration, which shall be held in december of this year in the city of marrakesh. at that conference, the global compact for safe, orderly, and regular migration will be adopted. and, in the framework of the state of kuwait's pursuit of whatever contributes to the elevation of the styles of life, we have undertaken measures to accord with the implementation of the agenda for sustainable development. these measures had a priority over various national plans and programs, and with the participation of all sectors of society. all of this has been concretized by a futuristic national vision for "a new kuwait" to be accomplished by 2035. the aim of this vision is to transform kuwait into a regional center, and a financial, commercial, cultural, and institutional pioneer. the state of kuwait has been keen on shouldering its regional and international responsibilities towards achieving development in all its economic, social, and environmental perspectives. this is being done by going through various long courses, with a view to putting into effect the initiatives of his highness, the amir of the state of kuwait, to advance international partnerships. such partnerships have come to complement the continuous history of kuwait in the developmental and humanitarian fields. \r^t\ v \ . ' '••a y^''t-~<r>i'^ 'diwan of 'fde frime uimster stateof'kuwait ^ ^ in this regard, kuwait has not spared any effort in its striving for the offering of developmental aid to developing countries, as well as least developed countries. these states had so far numbered 106. we perform our role as an active member of the united nations through our various institutions, of which the most prominent is the kuwait fund for arab economic development, by offering grants and soft loans for infrastructure projects in the developing countries. the amount of such assistance is more than double the internationally agreed upon percentage for formal development assistance. i cannot but stress the adherence of the state of kuwait to the international multilateral system and to the principles and purposes of the united nations charter. here, we express our views in the importance and necessity of moving forward with all efforts guaranteeing the continuation and the contribution of our cherished organization, through having all states fulfill their commitments and responsibilities to which they have consented under agreements and international conferences. thereby contributing towards finding fair and just solutions to global threats and challenges. in this way, we would have accomplished the lofty goal of the maintenance of international peace and security. in conclusion, i would like to express my thanks for your attention, and apologize if my statement has taken too long. the peace, mercy, and blessings of allah be upon you 10