republic of mozambique office of the president “making the united nations relevant to all persons: global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies” statement by his excellency filipe jacinto nyusi, president of the republic of mozambique, at general debate of the 73rd session of the united nations general assembly. new york, 25th september 2018 madam president of the 73rd session of the united nations general assembly; mr secretary general of the united nations; your excellencies heads of state and government; excellencies; ladies and gentlemen! it is with a great honor that we address the 73rd session of the united nations on the general debate. we warmly congratulate her excellency maria espinosa garcês, for her election to chair this session of the general assembly which meets under the theme “making the united nations relevant to all persons: global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies”. we would like to assure you, madam president, of mozambique’s full support as you discharge your mandate. we commend the outgoing president, mr miroslav lajčák, for the remarkable success of his tenure during which he was consistently committed in mobilizing the international community for the implementation of agenda 2030 on sustainable development. we want to express our appreciation to the secretary general of the united nations, mr antónio guterres for the dedicated work he has been doing in leading the organization for the cause of international peace and security and sustainable development. allow me also to express our deep condolences for the passing of mr kofi annan, former secretary general of the united nations. annan has honored africa and the world with his dedicated devotion for global just causes. the general assembly, equally, takes place in the year when the icon for the struggle for freedom, peace, equality and fraternity, nelson mandela would turn a hundred 1 years old. nelson mandela and kofi annan are two eminent personalities that should inspire our collective strive for a better world, for peace, prosperity, security and welfare of the peoples. madam president; excellencies! mozambique recognizes the role of the united nations in promoting dialog and upholding the principle of peaceful settlement of conflicts that continue to affect peoples and nations and are the source of human rights violations and hinder inclusive and sustainable development. the united nations is the mother forum for multilateral dialog that brings together commitments of states in the context of implementation of globally assumed agendas and other instruments on the achievement of shared goals. the uneven and fractured world needs multilateralism to overcome its gaps lacunas. the progress made so far, is an unequivocal evidence that the sharing of responsibilities is a global imperative, and an essential vector to building a harmonious, just and peaceful world. i am referring, for instances, to the implementation of the paris agreement on climate change, the efforts aimed at eliminating nuclear weapons, to regulate and humanize migration to avoid humanitarian catastrophes. in the list of multiple examples, i also cite those issues related human rights and good governance, peaceful resolution of conflicts and development financing, among others. in this regard, mozambique supports the secretary general in his efforts to reform the united nations system and make it adequate to its purposes. the country 2 commends his inclusive approach of involving the united nations member states in each stage of the process. in addition to the reforms underway, it is also urgent to fast-rack the security council reforms, an important element that will contribute for the reaffirmation of the relevant role of the united nations in finding sustainable solutions to challenges of peace and security the humanity is faced with. the difficulties to reach consensus among the united nations member states to initiate negotiations on this matter, also limit the capacity of the security council to act, as one the pillars, without which the success in the implementation of the agenda 2030 will be a mirage. these reforms will ensure that the united nations are truly relevant to all peoples, which we all cherish. madam president; ladies and gentlemen! regarding peace and security, mozambique continues to follow with deep concern the prevalence and resurgence of inter and intra state flash points of political instability, particularly in africa and the middle east. we have followed the tension in the korean peninsula, as well as fundamentalism and acts of violent extremism. our country hopes that peace initiatives underway at global level and the actions to contain recruitment and funding of terrorist groups will result into opportunities to promote further the people’s harmonious development the right to self-determination of the people of western sahara and palestine remains a concern of the international community. lack of progress in the referendum on self-determination of the people of western sahara continues to be a source of concern to peace loving people. we believe that the solution to the palestinian problem is based on the existence of two states, side by side, in the light of the principles of international law, namely 3 those related to good neighborliness, peaceful co-existence, dialog and tolerance. mozambique, once again, joins most states present in this hall, in appealing to the normalization of political, diplomatic, economic and financial relations between cuba and the united states of america. excellencies! mozambique has also dedicated efforts to removing the obstacles to peace and promoting inclusiveness and an enabling environment for equitable and sustainable development. commitment to the national constructive dialog has enabled meaningful progress towards the settlement of differences and building an effective, lasting and sustainable peace which provides the necessary environment for the strengthening of national unity, reconciliation and resumption of the country’s economic growth. soon after becoming the mozambican head of state, in january 2015, i decided to personally commit to finding peace for my country. i did so because both my country and the humanity, were still the target of tragic conflicts which proved that all wars always punish peoples. fortunately, for more than two years guns have been silenced in my country, thanks to the direct engagement in dialog with the now late leader of renamo. now there is consensus that everything has been done in my country, peace was the best achievement i recorded as a president. as a result of the dialog, the mozambican nation witnessed in june this year the approval by the national assembly, of the republic of mozambique constitution and the review of the electoral law, and innovative elements were introduced in the 4 decentralization of the country, with a view to reducing post electoral conflicts and deepening of democracy. these steady steps in the political dialog are an indelible milestone in the multiparty system in the country, as we intend to hold the general elections any armed political party like in the previous cycles. therefore, a process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of remnant opposition armed elements. as a proof that mozambique upholds democracy, local elections will be held in 53 municipalities, on the 10th october 2018, with the participation of various political parties and civil society organization. already towards the end of next year general elections will be held within the new consensually agreed framework with the party that engaged in the armed conflict. this framework has been approved by the national assembly. due to the complexity of the matter, in technical and financial terms, the government seizes this solemn opportunity to thank the international community for the support and care. one cannot build with ease what has been destroyed. hence, we appeal that more assistance is rendered so that peace, reconciliation and development can be worked out and the process of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of remnant armed elements due to be initiated shortly materializes in the country. the mozambican people are determined to live in peace. the government of mozambique is currently committed to fighting organized crime which destabilizes and threatens our efforts of national development, we are determined to neutralize the groups of criminals that are attempting to undermine the order and tranquility in some districts of the north of cabo delgado province. in our measures against these criminals we count on the support of all because this is a repugnant crime of global nature which involves both nationals and nonnationals, who are still faceless and without arguments and tending to spill over to other neighboring countries. 5 we cannot think of democracy, i said, of human rights, when the fundamental human right, the right to life is endangered. madam president! mozambique takes with a deep sense of responsibility, its commitments in relation to the sustainable development goals. it is in this context that our 2015 – 2019 national governing agenda is aligned with the agenda 2030. we are convinced that the implementation of these goals will result in the creation of a fairer, more equitable and solidarity society. these are the premises for the broadening of social justice in our country. our government has made efforts so that the implementation of its national agenda creates opportunities for its citizens and, particularly women and the youth, within the framework of the demographic dividend in our society. “making the united nations relevant to all persons”, presupposes not leaving anyone behind, and it is a theme so important that it should not be neglected. therefore, special attention must be payed to policies and strategies meant to protection and full enjoyment of persons’ rights, promotion of gender equality and equity, as well as the capacity building of women, the youth and other vulnerable people who are the majority of our peoples. as alluded to, social justice, means continuous promotion of gender equality, a field where we have made significant strides at political, economic and corporate level. we have also undertaken efforts to increase access to basic services of health, education, water and sanitation for all populations. 6 another key element to establish the relevance of the united nations to persons is to ensure food and nutrition security, by prioritizing agriculture in our national development strategy. since the inception of the new administration in the country, in 2015, on the basis of domestic resources mobilization and the dedicated efforts of our people, we have been able to substantially increase agricultural, livestock and fisheries production and productivity. in this way, we intend to achieve the goal of sustainable development of ending hunger well before 2030, which requires an increase of public and private investments. regarding the fight against corruption, another evil that undermines the achievement of our global, regional and national goals, our government has promoted and conducted actions with a view to attaining high standards in practices of good governance, in all its dimensions, political, economic and corporate. to this end, we have adopted laws, policies and strategies for a fierce fight against corruption. we continue building institutional and human capacity to ensure the enforcement of anti-corruption laws, as well as to raise awareness of social actors and institutions on the negative impact of this scourge, always abiding by the established principle of separation of powers. in the context of climate change, mozambique, as one of the countries most exposed to this phenomenon, continues to take measures of adaptation and resilience within the framework of the paris agreement, to which we are party since june this year. we have adopted the policy of biodiversity conservation, under which 25% of our national territory is dedicated to conservation. at the same time, we are promoting the development of communities in conservation areas or adjacent areas engaging the communities in the protection and preservation of this valuable natural resource. 7 we have fostered the use of renewable energies in rural areas, sustainable management of natural resources and conservation of ecosystems and biodiversity, as well as the sharing of benefits. from this podium we want to call for the international cooperation in terms of financial and technological means to build capacities to complement our own efforts. mr president; ladies and gentlemen! we would like to conclude our remarks by reiterating the government of the republic of mozambique’s unconditional commitment to continue performing its part in the critical role of the united nations to find solutions to problems affecting humankind. the united nations will always be a platform that brings us together around the collective commitment towards the noble ideals on which this universal organization has been founded: “saving future generations from the scourge of war” and “promoting social progress and better living standards in greater freedom”. let us remain faithful to these supreme interests enshrined in the united nations charter and let us work together to build peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies. thank you very much for your attention! 8