general assembly seventy-third session 26 september 2018 statement by hle. ms. etna solberg prime minister of noruuay president, excellences, ladies and gentlemen, in 1945, when we established the united nations, e pledged to save future generations from the scourge of war. to ork together to promote economic and social advancement to uphold respect for human ri hts and fundamental freedoms for all. our job is not done. challen es remain, but pro ress can and must be made. our common global interests are also national interests. we can achieve more when we act together. both our prosperity and many of our challen es are the result of global trends. trade conflicts, violent e tremism, climate change and instability at the lobal level directly affect us at home. but so do the benefits of world trade, the global fi ht against infectious diseases, and the rule of law. ' the 17 sustainable development goals recognize that lobal challenges are national challenges, and that the are closely interlinked. the goals require us to take both national and international action. () we must deal ith the challenges of globalization hile at the same time maximizing the benefits for our citizens. our job is to deliver security, jobs, education and healthcare. workin to ether has enabled all of us to do far more than we could have done alone. norway has taken national and international action. throu h our national policy to promote sustainable livelihoods. through our nordic and european partnerships on economic and civic inte ration. and throu h global action to promote peace and security, sound management of the oceans, fair and re ulated trade, education for all, and global health measures. together we have achieved impressive results. because international cooperation works. e treme povert has been halved, people live longer, child mortality rates are falling, and more irls attend school than ever before. global political cooperation, global trade, and international law have been crucial to this progress. president, we have to recognize that globalization has not been equally beneficial for all. this is a very real challenge. exclusion can spur radicalisation. it can undermine confidence in international institutions and cooperation. eventually it could weaken respect for international la , human rights and even our security architecture. to counter this, we must secure the future welfare of a rapidly growin population. this re uires both protection and reform of fundamental trade norms. we cannot afford to let protectionism, discrimination and economic rivalry define our future. the wto is essential for norway and our interaction with the world. i believe rules-based trade is just as important for our partners. free trade creates winners. protectionism does not. () in order to benefit all, rights, rules and responsibilities must be modernized to fit our current global economy. this is vital if we are to build a world where people s potential, creativity and ho es for the future can be realized through cooperation, e change of knowled e and trade. increased protectionism forces us to reflect on what less international cooperation would entail. president, as we agreed in 1945, all nations must unite in a commitment to maintain international peace and security. the consequences of instability affect us all. and global security threats require global responses. the security council must be able to act, and so must we - as nations and as re ional or anisations. areas of conflict and instability are breeding grounds for violent e tremism and international terrorism, the conflict in syria is but one e ample. many different actors are involved, both state and non-state. banned weapons of mass destruction have reappeared. humanitarian access is obstructed. respect for human rights and international law is undermined. on my own continent, europe, fundamental rules and principles of international law are now in jeopardy. ukraine’s soverei nty and territorial integrity within internationally recognized borders must be restored. violent extremism, conflict and instability lead to humanitarian crises and violations of human rights. these in turn are some of the main drivers of both regular and irregular migration.terrorism and violent extremism affect us all and are not limited to any single ideolo y, reli ion or belief. (chec against delivery) norway is standing up a ainst violent e tremism and terrorism. not in response to individual incidents, but as a lon -term foreign policy commitment. we are one of 79 members of the global coalition against isil by working to ether we have achieved si nificant results on the ground. still, in the continued fi ht a ainst violent extre ism, we must apply a whole-of-societ ap roach. we must address the root causes. in the middle east and else here, includin in our o n countries and continents. we must brin individual perpetrators to justice and prevent impunity. norway believes that those responsible for grave violations of international humanitarian law must be held accountable. we have, from the beginning, been a staunch supporter of the icc as an independent institution. at the same time, security is closely linked to sustainable development. we must boost trade and job creation. build capacity for generating domestic revenue. strengthen public service delivery. and combat corruption. corruption fuels inequafity, crime, instability and violence. president, conflict can reverse years of spcial and economic progress. conflict prevention, peacekeeping and disarmament are vital if we are to reach the sustainable development goals. we should heed the secretary-general s call for a sur e in peace diplomac . norway is doin its part. since the end of the cold war, conflict mediation and resolution has been a cornerstone of our forei n policy. (check against deli ery) for more than 25 years, we have been engaged in efforts to resolve conflicts around the world. from the first oslo accord in 1993, to on oing work in colombia and the philippines, and back to the middle east. we have learned an important lesson from our efforts: ne otiatin a peace a reement is always difficult; but implementin the agreement is even harder. the majority of conflicts recur. in fact conflict recurrence is more common than the onset of ne conflicts. this means that the best way to prevent conflict is to ensure that peace is sustainable. norway remains committed in colombia, the philippines and elsewhere, just as we remain committed to helping to achieve a negotiated two-state solution between the israelis and palestinians. president, the adoption of agenda 2030 with the 17 sustainable development goals demonstrated the uni ue value of the united nations. we have a reed on a universal development agenda - a roadmap to the world we want. the sdgs are closely interlinked. achievin oal 16 on peace, the rule of law and stron institutions is crucial for ensurin that funds are not lost to corruption. and achievin the sdgs related to economic conditions, will make f nding available that can be used to make progress on other goals. but we have no time to lose. sustainable chan e cannot be brou ht about overni ht. national ownership is critical, but civil society, the private sector, trade unions and the scientific community all have a catalytic role to play. (chech against delivery) president, health is an area where it is easy to see that the sdgs apply to us all. health is both a human ri ht in itself and a prerequisite for development investin in national health systems is expensive. but failing to do so can prove even more costly. the world health organization is working to create a lobal action plan for a simpler health architecture. this is a response to an initiative by ghana, germany and norway. the. action plan will be presented in berlin in october. prevention saves lives, reduces human sufferin and enhances economic and social development. norway is proud to be hostin the first replenishment conference of the global financin facility (gff) in oslo on 6 november, and will contribute substantially. president, progress on one sdg will stimulate pro ress on others. for example, child mortality rates fall when mothers have an education. however, there are still more bo s than irls who et an education. we have to put irls at the center of our education efforts. but just oing to school is not enough. this is why norway has focused on teachin quality and learnin outcomes. ensuring qualit education requires continued international financing, and the financing ap is considerable. it is therefore important to mobilize domestic resources and private funding alon side official development assistance. norway is doin its part. so far this year, we have allocated approximately 440 million dollars to lobal education. and we will now increase our support to education efforts targeting irls to nearly 40 million dollars for the period 2018 to 2019. (check against deliuery) president, clean and healthy oceans that are sustainably harvested are a prere uisite for reaching the sdgs. 50 % of the world s oxy en comes from the oceans. and 30 % of the world s c02 emissions are absorbed by the oceans. our oceans offer us enormous renewable resources. a source of great promise and economic potential. almost half of the world's population already depends on the oceans for nutrition and employment. but in order to ensure a sustainable ocean economy, we must produce more from the oceans. however, the sustainability of our oceans is threatened. by 2050 they could contain more plastic than fish. marine litter is one of the fastest rowin en ironmental concerns. since i started speakin , a further 200 tons of plastic will have ended up in the sea. the un environment assembly has taken a bold step and adopted a vision of zero discharge of plastic litter into the ocean. now e must translate this into action. mana in our oceans sustainably is crucial. increased global funding is imperative. norway will di deep to contribute. we have no time to lose. this is why, earlier this week, i established the high-level panel for a sustainable ocean economy, made up of heads of state and government from all continents. we aim to promote science-based decision-makin in the fields of ocean economy and ocean mana ement. we ill cooperate closely with the un special envoy for the ocean and other ocean initiatives. we aim to present our report in 2020. (check against deiiuery) president, for seven decades, norway has been a consistent supporter of the united nations and a rules-based multilaterar order. we are one of the largest financial contributors to the un. we consistently allocate 1 % of our ross national income to development aid. there is broad support for the un and for our enga ement in sustainable development and peace across the political spectrum. in 2021 it will be 20 years since norway last had a seat on the security council. we are ready to serve again. if e are elected, we will work to make the security council more transparent, efficient and representative. we will work with other member states - re ardless of their size, wealth or eo raphical location - to find common solutions. we will draw on our experience of peace and reconciliation processes. as women s ri hts and participation are crucial for lasting peace and stabilit , we will keep this issue hi h on our agenda. to ether with partners from many re ions, norway will support initiatives for sustainable oceans and forests. we will hi hlight the consequences of climate change and the link between security and sustainable development. we will promote reform of the council to make it more transparent and representative and better equipped to deal with current lobal realities. norway will continue to be a consistent partner to the un. we will continue to seek common solutions to the challen es we face in our common future. () and we do of course ask for your support for our candidature. thank you. ()