statement by h.e mr. yousef bin alawi bin abdullah minister responsible for foreign affairs united nations general assembly session new york 29 september 2018 nations permanent mission of the sultanate ofoman to the united nations 5 dag i-hwunarskjdld plaza 305fmsi 47" slreei. 12"'floor. .\'e^v york. ny 10017 tel: (212) 355-3505 fax: (212) 644-0070 madame president, at the outset, i would like to extend the warmest congratulations to you and your friendly nation, on your election as president of the 73rd session of the united nations general assembly, and i assure you the support of the permanent mission of the sultanate of oman to your excellency's efforts in order to ensure the success of the current session. we are also pleased to express our appreciation to your predecessor, h. e. mr. miroslav lajcak, for the manner in which he steered the work of the previous session, and for the decisions that were taken during his tenure. i also would like to seize this opportunity to commend the efforts exerted by the secretary-general of the united nations, h. e. mr. antonio guterres in strengthening the role of the organization and developing its mechanisms, so as to achieve the goals, principles and charter of the united nations. madame president, the work of the united nations must foeus on facing challenges, settling international disputes and conflicts, achieving peace. hence, in the spirit of my country's firm believe that dialog and negotiation are the most convenient means of resolving difference; we confirm that the sultanate of oman will spare no effort in supporting the initiatives that will achieve peace, spread security and stability in the middle east and the world. we consider that peace is a central building block for stability and development. as such, we hope that member countries shall cooperate within new perspectives that are consistent with the principles of goodneighborliness, respect for the national sovereignty, and non intervention in the internal affairs of other states. madame president, the palestinian cause is the central problem for the middle east. therefore, the cooperation of the international community in creating a suitable environment to help the parties involved end the conflict is considered, as a matter of particular strategic urgency. we think that despite the difficult current situation and the stalemate in dialog, however, it is convenient to create favorable conditions for positive discussions between the palestinian and israeli parties, to reach a comprehensive settlement, based on the two-state solution, since not establishing a palestinian state will perpetuate violence and terrorism. we, in the sultanate of oman, are willing to make every effort in our disposal to restore the optimistic environment, in order to reach a comprehensive agreement, taking into account, the future of peaceful co existence in the middle east, particularly between palestinian and israeli generations. for, achieving a peaceful environment between the palestinian and israeli parties is essential to establish peace in the region. we also call upon countries of the world, particularly, the united states, which has an essential role in achieving peace and stability in the world, to consider the future of this cause from the perspective of supporting orientations in peace, facilitating the work of international organizations, and not sacrificing peace. madame president, the suffering of the republic of yemen, manifested in a tragic humanitarian and economic situation due to the collapse of infrastructure in health, education, and other crucial services that affect the daily life of citizens, as well as the spread of diseases and inadequate medical treatment and medicines, requires all of us to double our efforts to help yemen. the international community has to adopt a humanitarian project that would enable access to humanitarian aid by the yemeni people in different provinces, and facilitating the use of airports and ports for that end, because the dire humanitarian situation requires taking such measures. in this context, my country welcomes the efforts pursued by the united nations and the countries of the coalition to establish a humanitarian medical airlift to patients with critical conditions, so that they receive medical treatment via scheduled flights, under the auspices of the united nations and in collaboration with the yemeni parties. also, my country supports the efforts of the special envoy to yemen, martin griffins and calls on facilitating his mission in holding meetings and consultations with all yemeni parties, and facilitating their transportation to participate in such meetings. we envision that the political solution should take into account, the yemeni reality, and that all yemeni parties and political forces, in yemen and abroad, should be given a chance in determining a prosperous future of their country. i would like to confirm that the facilities and humanitarian assistance provided by the sultanate of oman to the brotherly yemeni people is continuing, and that the land, sea and air entry/exit points, between the sultanate of oman and yemen, which is the only available means for the brotherly yemenis to cross and interact with the outside world, shall remain open on grounds of brotherly and neighborly considerations, deep historical and social ties between the omani and yemeni peoples, and for the impact of humanitarian suffering of yemenis on us. as far as the syrian crisis is concerned, violence is receding apparently in several syrian areas, due the effort led by the russian federation, the syrian government, the united states, and the european union and regional countries, through the plan to reduce violence and tensions. undoubtedly, the collaborative effort had a significant role in combating terrorism; and we hope that such efforts and joint cooperation continues in syria and other conflict areas. we also laud the efforts achieved by the special envoy to syria, staffan de mistura in helping the syrian parties develop the constitutional foundation, and build on what has been accomplished in geneva, astana and sochi to stop the war and reach a national reconciliation that ends the conflict. madame president, my country would like to welcome the positive developments in the african horn region and the understandings reached by states in the region, which will result in restoring confidence and ending differences. we welcome the efforts led by the ethiopian prime minister abiy ahmed and the pivotal role played by his country, which shall translate into achieving security and stability in the african horn. in conclusion, my country renews its call upon all countries of the world to adhere to the principles of united nations and international law, and resolve differences in peaceful means, without resorting to wars, and consequently, their tragic fallouts, so that there would be security, stability, development and prosperity for the peoples of the world. thank you.