permanent mission of tajikistan to the united nations 216 east 49* str., new york, n.y. 10017; tel: (212) 207-3315; fax: (212) 207-3855; e-mail: tajimstanun@mfa.tj statement by h.e. mr. mahmadamin mahmadaminov permanent representative of the republic of tajikistan to the un, head of the delegation of the republic of tajikistan at the general debates of the 73rd unga session making the united nations relevant to all people: global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies distinguished madam president, at the outset, on behalf of the government of the republic of tajikistan, i would like to extend to the president of the 73rdsession of the united nations general assembly, maria fernanda espinosa garces, our sincere congratulations on her well-deserved election. we are confident that her wisdom, diplomatic experience and skills will contribute to the success of the current session of the united nations general assembly. she can rest assured of my delegation's constant support and cooperation in this regard. i would also like to take this opportunity to commend h.e. mr.miroslav lajcak, the president of the 72nd session of the united nations general assembly for his able leadership during the previous unga session. distinguished colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, we live in an ever-changing world. the unprecedented level of instability and uncertainty is on the rise in many parts of the world. global challenges such as climate change, terrorism and extremism, large-scale conflicts, inequality, poverty, food and water security, lack of education and economic opportunities, unemployment, to name a few, further affect the status quo. today s global challenges exert pressure on the very foundations of the world order and principles of international relations. they undermine the efforts of the international community at achieving the 2030 agenda and its sustainable development goals. under these circumstances, making the united nations relevant to all people: global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies becomes very pertinent. and using the words of our former un secretary-general, the great diplomat and outstanding human being, late kofi annan, who said we have a tendency to go through life as a individuals and organizations, often focusing and stressing. this is what we do. but that is the wrong question. we should be asking what should we be doing in this changing world. the world is changing and the un has to change and adapt with it. we can not be static . as a universal institution, the un should continue carrying out its noble mission of coordinating the efforts of its member states to enhance the resilience of the countries to respond to the modern threats and challenges. 2 at the same time, member states shall also play an active part in this process by meeting their commitments undertaken in 2030 agenda, addis ababa action agenda and paris agreement, to restore stability and thereby to ensure development. full implementation of the above milestone documents is required to address many of the socio¬ economic problems, the main drivers of extremism and terrorism. madam president, my country believes that the response to the ever-increasing threat of terrorism and violent extremism should be comprehensive, with the un as a key coordinator. the efforts should be focused on the elimination of the military infrastructure of international terrorism, on depriving it of political, military and financial support; on prevention of the use of the icts for radicalization of minds, recruitment and propaganda of extremism and violence. to discuss the issues, the government of the republic of tajikistan, in close cooperation with the united nations, the organization for security and cooperation in europe, the european union and some partner countries, convened in dushanbe on 3-4 may 2018 the high-level international conference countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism , we are confident that the dushanbe conference served as an excellent platform for constructive and fruitful cooperation, inter alia, contributed to the achievement of a general recognition of the negative impact and consequences of the current challenges; exploring possibilities for strengthening partnership and cooperation at all levels and exchanging experiences in countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism. furthermore, to address the evolving transnational threat posed by the terrorist group and its affiliates member states and the un system should continue to strengthen and promote the effective use of necessary tools and measures. it is essential that we jointly search for ways of addressing the issues of poverty, the negative impact of globalization, preventing and resolving conflicts. there is also a need to strengthen an intercultural and interfaith dialog, mutual trust and tolerance. in this context, the united nations remains a critically important platform for achieving consensus on the main issues of international security and development, as well as for coordination of joint actions of the international community in addressing challenges and threats of the contemporary world. madam president, peace is the main prerequisite for creating equitable and sustainable societies across the world. therefore, we believe that stable peace in the middle east can be achieved only through a comprehensive settlement of the crisis, which in turn will contribute to enhancing global security. we support international and regional efforts aimed at restoring and strengthening peace and stability in the middle east, including the efforts towards resumption and acceleration of the credible negotiations within the middle east peace process. we also support the international strategy for a comprehensive settlement and post-conflict rehabilitation in afghanistan. we need to strengthen our assistance to the government of afghanistan, especially during afghanistan s transformation decade (2015-2024). 3 urgent socio-economic recovery is a must for development and prosperity of afghanistan. targeted assistance to this war-torn country aimed at economic recovery, strengthening the social sphere and creation of new jobs should be expanded. to this end, the involvement of afghanistan in the process of multifaceted regional cooperation is critical for the success of the efforts undertaken by the international community. we are willing to take part in the rehabilitation of the social and economic infrastructure of afghanistan through connecting the transport arteries of our two countries, creating an energy bridge casa-1000, providing the afghan population with essential commodities and training specialists. distinguished colleagues, we are in the third year of the implementation of the 2030 agenda and its sustainable development goals. the recent high-level political forum has vividly demonstrated that despite certain progress there are early signs that the countries are not on track to reach sdgs by 2030. it is alarming to observe this situation, particularly at the stage, when the countries just started incorporating/aligning the 2030 agenda with their national development strategies. the mistakes of the mdg era should not be repeated. for this reason, there is an urgent need to step up efforts on all fronts aimed at achieving our ambitious goal - to transform our world for better by 2030. the first step to be undertaken is to strengthen the means of implementation, especially for the developing countries. mobilization of financial resources, including oda, long-term investments, revitalized global partnerships, capacity building and transfer of environmentally sound technologies to the developing countries are needed to adequately and timely attain sdgs by 2030. secondly, the national development efforts need to be supported by an enabling international economic environment. it is essential to revitalize international trade and investments - the main engines of economic growth and development. effective regional cooperation should also facilitate achieving sustainable development. as we pledged to leave no one behind in our collective journey, it is imperative to recognize that each country faces specific challenges in achieving the 2030 agenda, in particular, the most vulnerable countries such as the african countries, ldcs, lldcs and sids. therefore, we need to take into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development of those vulnerable countries and scale-up our assistance to them. with that in mind, we supported and welcomed the un secretary-general s un development system reform aimed at enhancing the un contribution to sustainable development. we believe that the new changes will transform the un system and will make it more capable of supporting the 2030 agenda and delivering better on the ground. madam president, 4 2018 was an important year not only for tajikistan, the country which actively advances the water agenda but to the entire water community across the globe. we witnessed a series of milestone events, starting in brazil with the 8th world water forum in brazil, then the launch of the water decade in new york, followed by the high-level international conference on international decade for action water for sustainable development, 2018-2028 in dushanbe, and culminating in new york with the hlpf 2018. each of the above events had a profound impact and made a significant contribution to the overall advancement of sdg 6 and other water-related goals of the 2030 agenda. for instance, the joint united nations and tajikistan high-level international conference on the water decade in dushanbe on june 20-22, 2018 brought together around 1500 people from 111 countries of the world. the conference also provided a timely and necessary platform for elaborating recommendations in the run-up to the hlpf where the sdg 6 had been reviewed. additionally, it helped among other things: - to increase attention to the water-related sdgs and targets at all levels, as well as to the interlinkages between different goals and targets; - strengthen cooperation and partnership at all levels to achieve water-related sdgs; - better understand how water contributes to achieving sustainability and how the lack of sustainability impacts water resources; - discuss the role of the dushanbe conferences for the implementation of the water for sustainable development decade; - moreover, most importantly, to discuss the importance of specific means of implementation, including monitoring, financing, capacity development, innovation, technology, knowledge, information, data, best practices, as well as promoting advocacy, networking and encouraging partnerships for action. encouraged by the success of the dushanbe conference and fulfilling the mandate of resolution 71/222, which declared the period of 2018-2028 as an international decade for action water for sustainable development , tajikistan is going to submit a draft proposal to the general assembly on the mid-term review of the implementation of the decade this fall. we sincerely hope that based on the success of the water decade resolution, which was co¬ sponsored in 2016 by the majority of member states the abovementioned draft resolution will enjoy your similar valuable support this time as well. thank you for your attention. 5