Excellencies
Distinguished delegates

1

I congratulate His Excellency Miroslav Lajcak on his

election as President of the 72^ session of the General

Assembly. I also congratulate Mr Peter Thomson ofFiji for his

leadership as President of the 7E' session.

2

We are meeting at a time of great imcertainty and

complex challenges globally. The old fault lines of race,

language and religion remain active. There is renewed anxiety

about jobs and inequality. New technologies and non-state

actors are challenging the international order. Terrorist groups

are using the intemet to spread their radical ideologies,

including in Southeast Asia. Cyber-attacks and fake news have

1

proliferated. Conflicts in many regions ofthe world remain and new ones have emerged.

3

In Northeast Asia, the DPRK's reckless actions are

raising tensions on the Korean Peninsula. Singapore strongly

condemns the DPRK's missile and nuclear weapon tests in

violation of UN Security Council resolutions. We call on the

DPRK to avoid further provocative actions and to fully

implement the resolutions adopted by the Security Coimcil.

4

In Myanmar's Rakhine State, a humanitarian disaster

has occurred in the aftermath ofa terrorist attack on 25"'August

2017 and related acts of violence. This is a complex inter-

commrmal issue with deep historical roots. It is the

responsibility of every government to protect civilians

regardless of their ethnicities and religious beliefs. I visited Nay Pyi Taw last week and had a frank discussion with Daw

Aung San Suu Kyi. ASEAN Foreign Ministers will be meeting

later this afternoon. ASEAN supports Myanmar seeking a

long-term solution to restore stability. Singapore will work

with ASEAN and Myanmar to extend humanitarian assistance

to all affected communities.

Mr President,

5

Every country seeks to achieve the same thing: to

ensure the security and prosperity of oin: people; and to create

a better future for our children. But no country, no matter how

wealthy, big or powerful, can achieve this alone.

Multilateralism,

intemational

law,

constructive

interdependence and win-win cooperation are crucial for the

sustainable growth and prosperity of all oiu countries. A strong

multilateral system reinforces the resilience of individual

countries. This is particularly true for small states, which

depend on a rules-based multilateral system for our survival

and success. Today, I will speak on the importance of

multilateralism, an open global economy, and inclusive

economic growth.

Mr President,

6

My first point is that a universal, rules-based

multilateral system is essential to solving the complex

challenges facing the world. No nation can solve trans-

boimdary problems alone. We need to work with each other to

build consensus and find solutions to global problems. The United Nations (UN) plays a critical role, as a platform for cooperation, based on the principles of mutual respect, mutual
benefit and international law.

7

In fact, the UN remains the only universal body best

placed to address problems of the global commons. A good

example is the adoption of the UN Convention on the Law of

the Sea (UNCLOS) in 1982, which is an enduring testament to

what collective political will can achieve. Today, UNCLOS is

the "constitution" that govems the use of the oceans.

8

The recent adoption of the Paris Agreement on

Climate Change and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

Development (2030 Agenda) showed that multilateralism can

respond to new challenges, especially when there is political

will and collective commitment. When dealing with global

issues like climate change, there is no alternative to

multilateralism. The UN must also deal with emerging global

challenges such as cybersecurity, counter-terrorism, and the

economic disruption caused by digital technologies, including

artificial intelligence.

9

If the UN is to remain relevant and effective, it must

also become "fit-for-purpose". There is much scope to

optimise S5mergies and minimise inefficiency. In this regard,

Singapore strongly supports the Secretary-General's efforts to

reform and restructure the UN; We welcome his management

reforms and his efforts to review the UN development system

as well as to streamline the peace and security architecture.

10

As a small state, Singapore has always been a strong

supporter of an effective UN. This year, we are proud that the

Forum of Small States (or FOSS), fovmded by Singapore in

1992, celebrates its 25*'' anniversary. Singapore is committed

to working closely with all states, including small states, to

support the work of the UN and to enhance its effectiveness.

11

Regional organisations are an important part of an

effective multilateral rules-based system. They help to

reinforce the principles of the UN charter and underpin

international law at the regional level. Equally important, they

help to build confidence and encourage habits of cooperation.

12

In Southeast Asia, ASEAN is celebrating its

anniversary. ASEAN has not only fostered regional economic

integration, it has secured regional peace and strengthened

national resilience by creating a sense of common identity in

the midst of great diversity. The prospects for ASEAN are

bright. Indeed, we have ambitious plans to do more, under our

vision of a united, resilient and innovative ASEAN

Community.

Mr President,

13

My second and related point is that an open global

architecture is essential for growth and sustainable

development. We have to make a choice between two models.

The first is a world divided by rival blocs, mercantilist

economies, proxy wars and zero sum competition. The second

model is an open interdependent world characterised by

enlightened national interests, win-win collaboration and

sustainable development. Singapore believes in the latter

model. In particular, an open, rules-based multilateral trading

system allows every country to prosper. For many countries,

especially small states, intemational trade and investments are

the primary pathway to growth and resilience. It is therefore important to remain steadfast in the face of rising protectionist sentiments. An open trading environment allows developing countries to export their goods and services and grow their economies. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is indispensable as it underpins the rules-based rhultilateral trading system and provides the framework for resolving trade
disputes.

14

The G20 is an important platform for discussing

global macro-economic and financial issues. However, it is

important that the G20 works closely with the UN and with non-members ofthe G20, in order to strengthen the multilateral system and to support the implementation ofthe 2030 Agenda.

We welcome the efforts of successive G20 Presidents to reach
out to non-members, in particular members of the Global Govemance Group, or 3G. As a grouping, the 3G will continue

to be an advocate for a more accountable and inclusive
framework of global govemance.

Mr President,

15

My third and final point is that inclusive economic

growth is a prerequisite to building resilient societies. Indeed,

the 2030 Agenda is fimdamentally a vision for achieving long

term inclusive economic growth, not only at the national level

but also at the regional and global level. It is a vision shared

by all countries. However, the challenge for every government

is to generate higher growth and create more jobs while

ensuring that no one is left behind.

16

In Singapore, we believe in hard work and self-

reliance. However, we also believe in taking care of fire weak

and vulnerable in every segment of our society. Our policies

on women, children, older persons, and persons with

disabilities, are designed to protect and uplift the most

vulnerable. We place great emphasis on racial and religious

harmony, and in building social cohesiveness.

17

Beyond resilience, successftil societies have to

embrace new technology and encourage innovation. The

digital revolution is fimdamentally changing the way we work.

the way we communicate and the way we live. We cannot wish away the change caused by disruptive technologies. We
have to restructure our economies and create new and better
jobs for our people. But this will not be an easy process.

18

The transformation caused by the digital revolution

will only be positive if we find ways to share the benefits

widely and reduce inequality. In Singapore, we have invested

heavily in education and skills training for our people, for both

the young and old, to give everyone an opportunity to build a

meaningful life. We want every Singaporean to have a stake in

our growth and success as a nation.

Mr President,

19

Let me conclude by saying that the UN has been a

catalyst for peace and development for more than seventy

years. It has made a significant difference to the lives ofpeople

around the world. In an environment ofincreased uncertainties,

the case for multilateralism becomes stronger, not weaker.

Now more than ever, we need the UN to help us find solutions

to difficult global issues. We need to safeguard and strengthen

our multilateral, rules-based system so that even the smallest country can survive and thrive as an independent, sovereign nation. We need an open global architecture based on
interdependence to secure sustainable prosperity for all. But
most of all, we need inclusive economic growth to empower all our people to lead a good and meaningfol life.
10


