UNGA72 AUSTRALIA'S NATIONAL STATEMENT
Page 1
Mr President

The United Nations was founded in response to the horrors of World War II.
Nations resolved to prevent a repeat of that catastrophic global conflict. Over
the decades since, we have worked together to build an international rulesbased order that ensures disputes can be resolved peacefully and that
interests of less powerful nations can be protected from the overt or coercive
pressure of more powerful states.

It dictates how nations should behave and towards each other. Thatorder has
supported and enabled the greatest economic expansion in human history.

There have been times over the past seven decades when the rules-based
order has been under pressure.

We are now in a time when the challenges to that order are increasing.

The UN Security Council is the custodian of international peace, and security.

Yet the authority of the Council is being challenged, undermined, even ignored.

The most egregious example is North Korea.

The regime of Kim Jong Un is openly defying the UN Security Council.

Page 2

Its illegal nuclear and missile programs violate multiple UNSC resolutions. The
security of millions of people is at risk as a result of North Korea's refusal to
abide by international laws and norms.

The International Monitoring System of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty confirms that North Korea is the only state that is currently testing
nuclear weapons and the only state to do so this century.

The Security Council has responded with tough new economic sanctions. It is
crucial that all UN member states and especially the Permanent 5, who have a
particular responsibility, strictly implement these sanctions to compel North
Korea to abandon its illegal programs.

The authority of the Council must be defended and upheld.

Australia will play its part in helping to resolve this crisis.

We have already put in place a range of autonomous sanctions, beyond that
mandated by the Security Council. We will explore further options, should
North Korea continue its flagrant disregard of the views of the international
community, as upheld by the Council.

The rules-based order is also being challenged by non-state actors, terrorism
and violent extremism.

Page 3

Global terrorism - and the extreme Islamist ideologies driving it - must be
confronted and defeated.

Many nations including Australia have suffered terrorist attacks.

We can most effectively combat and defeat terrorism if we work together,
sharing our knowledge and resources.

Our work continued this week at a meeting of the Global Counter-terrorism
Forum.

The use of chemical weapons presents another serious threat to the rules
based order.

We know they were used in Syria.

Australia supports the work of the UN - and the Organisation for the Prohibition

of Chemical Weapons - in identifying those who deployed these appalling
illegal weapons.

This work must continue.

Australia chairs the 42-member Australia Group, which works to prevent the
spread of chemical and biological weapons.

Page 4

Our rules based order has been supported by institutions and over the
decades, UN peacekeepers have become the defining image of the UN
response to conflict and security threats.

Fifteen peacekeeping missions are currently deployed across four continents.

Often they are the only authority preventing civil breakdown and lawlessness in
countries already suffering from conflict, poverty and despair.

Australia has been a long-term supporter of UN peacekeeping.

Last week in Canberra we commemorated the 70th anniversary of the first such
mission, noting that in 1947 Australia was the first nation to deploy into the
field, military observers to the then-Dutch East Indies ceasefire. We have
contributed to 20 more UN missions.

We support the work that is underway to ensure UN peacekeepers are better
trained, better equipped, more effective and act with greater integrity.

Peacekeepers operate in dangerous and unpredictable environments and
represent one of the most important global investments in peace and security.

Page 5

Australia welcomes the new UN Secretary General who has committed to
reforming the UN, to make it more effective as the defender and upholder of
the rules based order.

Australia fully supports Secretary General Guterres in that endeavour.

The UN must focus on conflict prevention as that is more effective than dealing
with the tragic consequences of conflict.

UN management systems must be made more efficient and accountable.

There must be more women in senior positions.

To achieve reform, Secretary General Guterres needs the full support of
member states.

The standing of the UN is maximised when we work together for the common
good.

Recent successes prove this to be true - the global arms trade treaty, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable Development Goals.

If we are to meet the challenges of our age, we must be guided by a spirit of
cooperation and compromise.

Page 6

Central to our task is to achieve sustainable and inclusive development. The
United Nations must play a more effective and agile role.

The UN development system should be more focused on sustainable
economic development to provide employment opportunities and facilitate
partnerships with the private sector.

Economic development and security are interlinked. One cannot be achieved
without the other.

Each country has to find its own model for prosperity and stability. However
there are many lessons to be learned from other nations, and much support is
available for nations seeking to establish regulatory frameworks in particular, to
support private investment that grows economies and generates employment.

Economic resilience can be undermined by natural and man-made disasters.

With the 2030 agenda, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the Sendai
Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction and the World Humanitarian Summit's
Grand Bargain, there is a blueprint for global action on those problems which
can only be addressed by working together on challenges that don't respect
national borders.

Page 7
These include climate change, diseases including malaria, managing our
precious water resources and modern slavery.

It is an unpalatable truth that forced labour, child labour, human trafficking and
modern slavery are rampant in the world today.

Australia has strongly committed to working with the international community to
urgently address these egregious crimes.

Last month Australia and Indonesia jointly launched the world's first regional
business government partnership to address modern slavery, and have
continued our advocacy with other nations this week. We will end these
abhorrent practices.

Australia is a strong supporter of the Paris Agreement, and here at the UN we
have voiced our support specifically on risk mitigation for coral reefs, which are
among the most valuable environments on our planet.

They support more biodiversity than almost any other ecosystem, are vital to
the world's fisheries, protect our coastlines and generate significant tourism
revenue. Coral reefs sequester four times more carbon than forests, and are a

vital element in our global efforts to reduce emissions.

Page 8

Worldwide, more than 30 coral reefs are listed as World Heritage sites, and 29
are under stress. As the custodians of the Great Barrier Reef and with our
extensive experience in reef management, we are seeking to bring our

expertise to other locations. We hope to serve on the World Heritage Council
next year.

Australia has worked with other countries on each of these issues during the
past week.

We are mindful that no matter how much we work on building strong, resilient
societies, crises will still occur.

Australia has been a strong contributor to relief efforts in Iraq and Syria, as well
as in South Sudan, Somalia and Yemen, where there are significant numbers
of displaced people, at increasing risk of famine. Australia is also supporting
those displaced by conflict in Rakhine State, Myanmar. We are contributing to
funding life-saving food for up to 300,000 people.

Australia also seeks to serve, for the first time, on the UN Human Rights
Council from next year.

I am grateful for the strong support from so many countries for our candidacy.

If elected, we will be a principled and pragmatic member of the Council.

Page 9

Australia will be the first nation on the Council from the South West Pacific.

We will have an agenda relevant to our region and globally.

Empowering women and girls to reach their full potential lifts a country's
productivity and underpins stability.

We will support freedom of expression.

The number of journalists and human rights defenders detained, abused or
killed each year should be of grave concern to us all.

We will support good governance and strong democratic institutions.

Similarly, we will promote strong, independent national rights institutions - to
raise awareness of human rights, to address violations and to hold to account
those responsible for abuses.

Australia is proud to be the home of the world's oldest continuous culture and
we will strive to advance the human rights of indigenous peoples around the
globe.

Australia reaffirms our commitment to the Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples.

Page 10

We will also work with other members to enhance the effectiveness of the
Human Rights Council, so that its work can make a meaningful difference to
the lives of individuals around the world.

The Council must remain relevant to the broader international agenda, making
a contribution to building stable, prosperous and compassionate societies.

We all strive for an environment in which countries can grow and prosper, in
which individuals can aspire to a life unburdened by the threat of violence and
driven by a shared vision of peace, compassion and community.

Australia, for its part, will work with others to protect an international order that
ensures all states can pursue their interests securely and that supports
cooperative responses to global challenges.

The United Nations can become an even more powerful force for stability in an
uncertain world.

It can live up to the ideals and universal principles on which it was founded.

The people of our world expect this body to inspire the best in human nature
and that is our duty.

Thank you.

