REPUBLIC OF
BOTSWANA

PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
BOTSWANA TO THE UNITED NATIONS
154 EAST 46TH STREET • NEW YORK, N.Y. 10017
TEL. (212) 889-2277

: ?iÿ ÿ ÿ:iÿiÿ ÿ ....
.... STAT-EIVIENT

BY
HIS HONOUR HR. iVtOKGWEETSI E. K. HASISI, N.Po,

THE VICE PRESIDENT
OF THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA
DURING THE GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE 7-2ND SESSION OF THE

UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEHBLY
21 SEPTEHBER 2017
UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK

Please check against deliver]/.

Mr. Presidentÿ
Excellencies,

Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
I feel deeply honoured and privileged to deliver this Statement
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Botswana, His
Excellency Lt. General Dr. Seretse Khama Ian Khama.

On behalf of my delegation, I wish to join previous speakers in
congratulating you on your election as President of the
Seventy-Second Session of the UN General Assembly.

I assure you of the full support and cooperation of my
delegation in the discharge of your mandate.
In the same vein, please allow me to pay tribute to your
predecessor, His Excellency IVlr. Peter Thomson, for his
stewardship of the Seventy-First Session.

lay I also seize this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to
our new Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antoni6

Guterres and to wish him an enjoyable and successful tenure
at the helm of our world body.
We also thank our erstwhile Secretary-General, His Excellency

Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his leadership and the valuable
contribution his has made towards advancing the mandate of
our organization over the past decade.
Mr. Presidentv

We are gathered here at the United Nations because we share
a common destiny. Despite its imperfections, the United

Nations remains the only universal organization that has the
moral authority and legitimacy to seek global solutions to the
challenges we face.

2

..............

Lÿ

8,

Botswana is of the firm conviction that as Member States, we

collectively hold the will and the power to change the world for
the better, and for the benefit of both present and future
generations.

Sustainable Development
Mr, President,
9,

Botswana welcomes the theme of this Session namely,
"Focusing on People: Striving for Peace and a Decent

Life for Aft on a Sustainable Planet."
o: We strongly feel that this theme is pertinent because it
reinforces the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which the global community adopted on 25th September 2015
as "a plan of action for people, planet and prosperity" or
"a charter for people, planet, prosperity, peace and
partnership in the twenty-first century."

. This theme appropriately draws our attention to the 4 of the 5
Ps of the 2030 Agenda, namely People, Planet, Prosperity
and Peace. It recognises the importance of focusing on people

and improving their lives, as the main beneficiaries of
development and the greatest resource, in order to realize
peace and development on a sustainable and resilient pathway.
By so doing, it recognises the nexus between peace and
security, sustainable development and climate change.
2. In this regard, the 2030 Agenda notes that "There can be no

sustainable development without peace and no peace
without sustainable development." It is therefore
imperative that we prioritise the implementation of the 2030
Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change in order
to achieve sustainable development and address climate
change.

13.

Regarding People, I am pleased to state that the Government
of Botswana embarked on a series of multi-stakeholder

consultations involving both the public and private sector, civil
society; local authorities, development partners and the
academia in the formulation of our National Development Plan

11 (2017-2023) and Vision 2036 (2017-2036), which are
aligned to the 2030 Agenda and the African Union Agenda
2063.
I4.

We purposefully undertook extensive consultations to ensure
that our national priorities reflect our people's needs and
aspirations.

15. We hold the view that our people have a right to sustainable
development and improved quality of life. We therefore must
pursue these twin objectives as a moral and political
imperative.

I6. It is important to recall that when we adopted Agenda 2030
some two years ago, we acknowledged that every Goal, every

Target and every Indicator in that Agenda represents a step
towards a better world.
17.

We recognised the need for each country, based on its needs
and circumstances, to formulate a unique set of actions to
achieve the Universal Goals we set for ourselves.

18. We also recognised that Innovation, Science and Technology

will be critical catalysts in the successful implementation of the
2030 Agenda.

I9. In line with the theme, our two national development

frameworks place heavy emphasis on improving the quality of
life of all people in Botswana through acceleration of socioeconomic development and provision of better education,
healthcare, housing and tackling extreme poverty, income

inequality, gender inequality and unemployment, especially
among the youth and women.
zo. Driven by our strong desire to build an inclusive, peaceful and
prosperous society based on the respect for democracy, human

rights and the rule of law, we accordingly adjusted our
emp°werment pr°grammes in o Eder t° ensure that they cater
for all vulnerable and disadvantaged groups in our society,

including women and girls, youth, the elderly, people with
disabilities, and children.
zÿ. To this end, the top priorities of our National Development Plan
11 are human capital development, social development,
developing diversified sources of economic growth, sustainable
use of natural resources, consolidation of good governance and

strengthening of national security, and implementation of an
effective monitoring and evaluation system.
z2. In order to ensure that all our people live in dignity, the

Government of Botswana took a bold policy decision to shift
from poverty reduction to eradication of extreme poverty,

resulting in a marked reduction of the proportion of the
population living in abject poverty or below US$1.25 per day
from 24.5% in 2002/2003 to 6.4% in 2009/2010. This is a
notable achievement considering the fact that in 1985/1986,
59% of the population was living in poverty.
z3. We identified sustainable use of natural resources as one of the
main priorities of our national development agenda to ensure

that the natural wealth of our country benefits both present
and future generations.

24. To address youth unemployment, the Government introduced
youth empowerment programmes such as the Youth
Development Fund, the National Service Programme, and the
Internship Programme. For the past two decades, more than

25% of the total Government's annual budget has been
invested in education and skills development.
25. In addition, we have implemented a number of flagship
programmes, the centerpiece of which is the Economic

Stimulus Programme (ESP), which was introduced to stimulate
the economy and address the infrastructure deficit.
26. We are also proud that Botswana was among the countries

which shared their 2030 Agenda implementation experience
under the auspices of the recently held High Level Political
Forum (HLPF) Voluntary National Review exercise.

Climate C:hanqe
Mr. President,

z. Botswana fully supports the observation made in the 2030
Agenda that "Climate change is one of the greatest
challenges of our. time and its adverse impacts
undermine the ability of al! countries to achieve
sustainable development."
28. In this regard, we welcome the entry into force of the 2015

Paris Agreement on Climate Change and reaffirm our
commitment to this Agreement.

29. Botswana is pleased to be among the countries which signed
and ratified this Agreement before the achievement of the
threshold of ratifications for its entry into force.
3o. We appeal to all countries to remain steadfast in their defence

and protection of the integrity of the Paris Agreement.
6

sÿ. We reiterate our appeal to the Government of the United
States of America to re-consider its decision to withdraw from
this landmark Agreement, which marks a universal effort by

the international community to tackle challenges of climate
change. As you would be aware, the challenge of climate
change requires collective action, as no single country can

successfully address this challenge on its own. ]:t is as if the
recent Hurricanes and their disastrous effects was to
underscore to the American Administration that climate
change is real.

3ÿ. If there is anything positive we have learnt from these
Hurricanes, it is that it has been able to bring people in the
affected States and wider America together, be they young or
old, black, hispanic or white or whatever religious persuasion.
ss. We also welcome the recent convening by the President of

the UN General Assembly of the first ever Ocean Conference
in New York, pursuant to Sustainable Development Goal 14.
sÿ. Even though Botswana is a landlocked country, we are

impacted upon one way or the other by the Ocean
environment.

sÿ. We also have a strategic interest in benefitting from marine
resources.
36.

It is for this reason that we actively participated in the
negotiations that led to the adoption of the 1982 Convention
on the Law of the Sea, to which we subsequently became a
State Party.

Tnternationa| Humanitarian Appeals
3z. I am delighted to announce to this august body that
Botswana has responded positively to international
humanitarian appeals which have been made from time to
time in response to humanitarian calamities which afflicted a
number of countries, including the extremely devastating
famine in Somalia.
38. Consistent with our caring and compassionate nature, we will

continue to do everything we can, within the limit of our
meagre resources, to extend assistance to fellow members of

the human family who are in dire need of humanitarian relief.
International Peace and Securit¥;ÿ
Mr. President,
39. According to its Charter, the UN was created "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war", and

yet peace continues to elude us, especially in some parts of
Africa, as well as in other parts of the worldi
40. There are continuing reports of raging conflicts, gross human

rights violations, extra-judicial killings, sexual violence,
arbitrary arrests and detentions.
41. Thesituation in South Sudan, in particular, continues to be a
cause for grave concern.

42. The country is virtually on a precipice.

43. The people of that country are yet to enjoy the peace that the
August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan was widely expected to deliver.

44. We therefore appeal to IGAD countries as the main guarantors i!/
of this Agreement, to constructively engage the leaders and i
political stakeholders in South Sudan, with a view to getting /I!

them to unconditionally commit to the full and effective iii
implementation of the Agreement.
"
lii

. Syria

Hr. President,

i

"

!il

4s. The political, security and humanitarian situation in Syria ! .
remains catastrophic:
- ........ /i!

}l
46. Botswana is onÿ record to have consistently expressed II
disappointment at the Security Council's failure to take decisive . lÿ
action on the situation in Syria. This is because some It
Permanent Members of the Council have from time to time 1ÿ
vetoed resolutions which were aimed at addressing the political ill
and humanitarian crisis in that country.
Ill
47,

In view of this unfortunate scenario, Botswana believes that

the international community should always resort to using the
moral power and authority of the General Assembly whenever
there is paralysis in the Security Council.
48. We also fully support referral of the situation in Syria to the
, :International Criminal Court (ICC) in order that those
responsible for committing war crimes and crimes against
humanity can be held accountable for their actions.

.9

North Korea
Mr. President,
49.

Botswana is deeply concerned about the unrelenting and
blatant contravention of international law and UN resolutions

by North Korea through its continuous testing of ballistic
missiles. These despicable acts by North Korea pose a threat,

not only in the Korean Peninsula, but throughout the Pacific
region and the world at large. It is obvious to us as it should be
to everyone else that North Korea is being assisted by others
to develop its missiles and nuclear technology. They are
therefore, as much to blame for these missile and nuclear tests
as North Korea is itself.
50.

We therefore appeal to the international community to work in
unison and take prompt and decisive action that will force
North Korea to adhere to the values and principles of the
United Nations Charter. Inaction is not an option in the face of
this adversity. Regime change must be brought about in order
to remove once and for all this everlasting threat to peace in
that region and give the North Korea people a hope for a life of
freedom and prosperity.

Western Sahara

Mr. President,
5ÿ. It is reprehensible that Western Sahara remains the only non-

self governing territory on the African continent.
52. We therefore reiterate our support for the people of Western

Sahara in the pursuit of their just and inalienable right to selfdetermination.

53.

We strongly feel that it is high time that they are allowed to ÿi!j
exercise this right through an independent and impartial
plebiscite under the supervision of the United Nations.

54.

The Saharawis have waited long enough for this to happen.
Palestine

55. We similarly support the people of Palestine in their legitimate
struggle for sovereignty and independent statehood.
56. As a gesture of our support and solidarity, I am pleased to

report that Botswana established diplomatic relations with the
State of Palestine on the 8th March 2017.
Terrorism
Hr, President,
57, Botswana strongly condemns terrorism, violent extremism and
racial intolerance in all their forms and manifestations.
58.

In this regard, it is deeply regrettable that we have recently
witnessed a spate of terrorist attacks on innocent people and
governments around the world.

59.

I am delighted to state that we stand firmly in solidarity with
the governments and people of the countries concerned and
also extend our deepest sympathy to them.

60.

We need to be constantly mindful of the fact that no single
country is immune from terrorist attacks. Theseattacks are a
stark reminder of the ferocious nature of terrorism.

6ÿ. The international community must therefore urgently take

concerted action to resolutely fight this scourge,

Nuclear,D, isarmament
Mr. President,
62. Botswana fully supports the international community's efforts
towards nuclear disarmament.
63. We also reaffirm our commitment to international instruments
that ban weapons of mass destruction such as the Convention

on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling
and Use of Chemical Weapons and the Biological Weapons
Convention.

64. In this respect, we welcome the recent adoption by the UN

General Assembly of a legally binding Treaty to prohibit the
production of nuclear weapons.
65. We are fully convinced that only a nuclear-free world would
guarantee a safer future for our populations.

Human Riqhts Council Membership.
Mr. President,

Botswana greatly values the opportunity it was given to
contribute to the promotion and protection of human rights
through its membership of the Human Rights Council for two
consecutive terms.

66. With the imminent termination of our tenure in the Council in
December this year, I wish to reaffirm that we will continue to
work earnestly with the international community to advance
the global human rights agenda and towards all the people of
the world to live in democracies where human rights and the
rule of law are upheld.

ez. Our advocacy on human rights is premised on the firm belief
that society's aspirations for sustainable development will
remain a mirage lest we re-double our collective efforts

towards equality and human dignity.
Conclusion
Hr. President,

eÿ. Permit me to conclude bY urging eyery0ne of us to maintain
the momentum on the implementation of Agenda 2030. Let
us summon our collective wisdom and strength, coupled with

our singularity of purpose to deliver real change for the
benefit of the people we represent.
. Botswana pledges to be an active and reliable partner in the
common endeavour to create a better and safer world of
shared prosperity, where no people, no region and no country

will feel left behind.
zo. This is the best legacy we can collectively bequeath to
posterity.

1: thank you for your kind attention,

