KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA
NATION RELIGION KING

STATEMENT
BY

HIS EXCELLENCY PRAK SOKHONN

SENIOR MINISTER,
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

OF THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

General Debate
72nd Session of the

United Nations General Assembly

New York, 22 September 2017

Your Excellency Mr. President,
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

1. On behalf of the Royal Government of Cambodia and on my own behalf, I
congratulate you, Excellency Miroslav Laj^^k, on your election as President
of the 72nd United Nations General Assembly. I would like to take this

opportunity to thank as well His Excellency President Peter Thomson of Fiji
for his commitment and dedication to the works of our previous UNGA
session. I join with previous speakers in expressing my deepest condolences

and sympathy to the victims of the earthquake in Mexico and their families.

2. My Delegation finds that the theme of this year's UNGA is extremely
relevant and sums up quite appropriately the six overarching priorities of
your Presidency which are responsive to the global megatrends that are

facing our world nowadays. The interactions between population growth,

massive migration movements, climate change and food insecurity render
these megatrends all the more worrisome.

3. Similarly, the same forces of globalization, which in the past have made us
so interdependent, are exposing deep flaws in the existing international
order. A quarter century after the end of the Cold War, the world became

by many measures more complex and challenging than ever before. Today,
our multipolar world has gained its prominence in global affairs, causing
chaos and turbulence as competition between the major powers is becoming
more confrontational; we are more interdependent, but more imequal; we

are more prosperous, and yet millions are still afflicted with poverty. All
these factors have contributed to a sense of a world out of balance, and this

is the paradox that defines our world today.

2 IPage

4. While sharing our deep concern on the situation in the Korean peninsula,
we appeal to all parties concerned to further exercise their utmost restraint

to avoid provocative activities and remain committed to the peaceful and
constructive dialogue so as to diffuse tension and promote trust and

confidence in the region. Another factor that destabilizes the collective
security is the unilateral and illegal embargo on Cuba. We ask that this

violation of the international law be brought to an end.
5. Mr President, it is true that globalization and technological progress have
dramatically increased global trade and wealth all over the world but it is

equally true that they have been factors of increase of inequality, social
tensions and sometimes conflicts. These fragilities, to a large extent, are
responsible for many of the conflicts and threats today.

6. One of those threats is terrorism from which no coimtry is spared. To defeat
this transnational threat would require a firm global resolve to address in
the most comprehensive way this scourge in all its forms, starting from
addressing the symptoms and root causes of radicalization, confronting
issues of Foreign Fighters and terrorism financing and other forms of
support.

7. Mr. President, let me touch upon two topics of relevance to this year's UNGA

theme, namely the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Climate
Change.

8. The 2030 Agenda is inextricably linked to many issues that perturb the
world today, the most pressing one being climate change, which is not only
a direct threat in itself but also a multiplier of many other threats ~ from
poverty, diseases and food security to mass migrations and regional

3 IPage

conflicts. In our view. Climate Change is a global Human Security issue that
presents a serious and imprecedented threat to global peace and security.
9. Cambodia is regularly ranked among the top ten most vulnerable coimtries

globally with extreme weather events damaging our infrastructure, severely
impacting on agriculture, disrupting economic activities and hampering
crucial social services for our vulnerable groups. While our contribution to

climate change is negligible and our domestic resources quite limited, we

have made nonetheless clear commitments to low carbon development and

look forward to developing partnerships with other progressive nations
who are committed to addressing this formidable challenge in a cooperative
and fair manner.

20.1 am pleased to note that the Paris Climate Agreement acknowledges the
principles of 'Common but Differentiated Responsibilities', meaning based
on the respective capabilities and different national conditions.

11.Indeed, the 2030 Agenda is our boldest agenda for humanity but it is an
agenda aiming at a fair globalization. Cambodia has demonstrated its
commitment to sustainable development over the past two decades.

Concretely, our target of reducing the poverty rate to 19.5% by 2015 was

achieved ahead of schedule. We have received a UN Award for halving
hunger before the deadline. Cambodia is also among the top seven
performers globally for its improvements in Human Development Index
between 1990 and 2015.

12.Mr. President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen. Speaking about peace and
security, Cambodia is proud of its unwavering commitment to the UN

peacekeeping efforts. More than 2 decades ago Cambodia received the UN

Blue Berets on their peacekeeping mission. Since 2006, we have dispatched
more than 4,700 troops to take part with great success and praise in UN

peacekeeping missions in a number of coimtries that are hot spots in the
4 I Page

world, like Sudan, South Sudan, Lebanon, Central African Republic, Chad,

Syria and Mali.
13.As you all know, peacekeeping operations are not without security risks.
Peacekeepers continue to come under attack from armed groups and
increasingly from terrorists. Last May, rebel ambushes in the Central
African Republic have killed and woimded our Cambodian peacekeepers.
Let's pay our tribute to those who have died while serving under the UN

Flag and remind ourselves to acknowledge their contributions in the

transformation of many coimtries from battlefields to peaceful States.
14.Mr. President, I now wish to address the issues of human rights and
democracy since my coimtry is regularly targeted by some countries, some
UN agencies as well as by those international NGOs active in these fields.
15.1 wish to reiterate that Cambodia upholds itself to the universal principle of

fundamental human rights and therefore we do not see any issue of
incompatibility with regards to the respect for national sovereignty as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations vis-^-vis the monitoring of
the application of these rights, provided that it be done in an impartial
manner, that it takes into accoimt all the pertinent factors on the groimd,

and that there is neither prejudice nor conjecture on the part of observers
against the democratically elected authorities.
16.So, what are the realities? 1 can go straight to the point! The assessment of
the human rights situation varies depending on the political predisposition
of certain great powers. The same reasoning holds true for the big
international NGOs, whose agenda are far from being politically neutral.
17.The issue of human rights and democracy is raised only when the specific
interests of certain major powers are at stake, at the vagaries of the moment.
Otherwise, it is sheer silence, and often a conspiracy of silence.

5 IPage

18.speaking of the deliberate political manipulation in the name of human

rights and democracy, my country have suffered such prejudice for more

than 12 years during which time the international community has denied
the existence of the worst mass crimes. As a survivor of the Pol Pot genocidal
regime, it pains me to hear nowadays the Special Rapporteur for Human
Rights in Cambodia referring to the crimes perpetrated by this regime as
mere "troubles".

19.We are relentlessly assailed by incessant criticism on matters that are

reported partially and in a biased manner. These reports without fail always

condemn the government and portrays the oppositions as martyrs of
democracy and human rights. Invariably, they are purposely drafted to go

against the government. At no time, the wrongdoings and illegal behaviors
of the opposition are mentioned.

20.1 am keen to know which country as represented in this General Assembly

would refrain from taking actions when their opposition politicians incite
people to remove border posts, inflame the crowd with heinous racist
remarks, publish false treaties and fake maps to make the people believe

that some parts of the country are annexed by the neighboring state? Which
coxmtry endorses defamation and slander? In most coimtries, calls for racial

hatred, xenophobic statements and speeches of the extreme right are
severely denounced, or even condemned, as we have just seen with the
events of Charlottesville. While they are the daily language of the

Cambodian opposition, never had it been condemned nor raised by NGOs
and the UN Special Rapporteur for Human Rights in Cambodia.
21.The most recent attacks on the Royal Government of Cambodia pertarn to

the expulsion of an institute affiliated with a foreign political party which,
imder the cover of democracy training, deliberately supports the opposition

and violates our law; the closure of a tax delinquent foreign newspaper; and
6 I Page

the arrest of an opposition official who, in a video recorded interview,

confessed to be an agent of a big power working to overthrow our
government. In what country, would such behavior of a foreign government
be tolerated? We have acted totally in accordance with the provisions

stipulated in our specific laws and 1can assure you that these actions are not
arbitrary as some critics would have led you to believe the contrary.
22.We can leam an important lesson from the history of my country: when we
have been forced to choose the path set by some Western powers, we ended

up suffering its worst consequences as manifested by one of the most
horrific human tragedies of the last century.
23.We must recognize that it is the Cambodian government, under the

leadership of Prime Minister Hun Sen, that has secured full peace for the
coimtry in 1998 with its own wisdom and means. We must admit that

certain practices imposed from the outside are often forming part of the
problem, not the solution.

24.Today we are accused of imdermining democracy because, under existing
laws, we are prosecuting and punishing people who violate these laws.
Those who criticize us, even threaten us, refuse to take into consideration

the crimes committed under the law by those whom they protect.
25.Mr. President. While acknowledging with sincere gratitude the great and
positive contribution that many countries have brought to peace and
economic development of our country, I will conclude by saying that the

discourse of certain governments on human rights and democracy will be
relevant and credible only when these coimtries choose to subject
themselves first to the same standards as others when it come to their own

assessments, criticisms and condemnations.

Thank you.
7 IPage

