REPUBLICADE CUBA
Misi6n Permanente ante las Naciones Unidas

STATEMENT BY H.E. Mr. BRUNO RODRIGUEZ PARRILLA, MINISTER OF
FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF CUBA, AT THE SEVENTY
SECOND SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY. NEW

YORK, SEPTEMBER 22, 2017.

Mr. President:

Mr. Secretary General;
Allow me to reiterate to you Cuba's, support to your work at the helm of the United
Nations and as a guarantor and advocate of international peace.
Heads of State and Government;

Distinguished delegates;
I would like to express my deep condolences to the relatives of the deceased and
the victims of hurricanes Irma and Maria, as well as our disposition to increase our
cooperation, to the extent of our modest possibilities, with the brother peoples and
governments of Dominica and Antigua and Barbuda, small Caribbean islands
which suffered a terrible devastation; with the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico,
Saint Martin, Sint Maarten, Virgin Islands and Anguilla.

I call upon the international community to give the highest priority to this situation
and mobilize resources to assist the small Caribbean Island States and territories
which have suffered such devastation.

We would like to convey Cuba's warmest feelings of solidarity to the government
and people of Mexico, particularly to the victims and their relatives, who were
affected by both earthquakes, and reiterate to them our disposition to assist the
population and support the recovery works with our modest efforts.
We also want to express our sorrow to the US people, as well as our heartfelt
condolences to the relatives of the deceased and to all of the victims of hurricane
Irma.

Mr. President:

I want to convey the testimony of the people of Cuba, who are currently carrying
out a colossal effort to recover from the severe damages caused by hurricane Irma
to housing, agriculture, the power system and other services. Despite the allencompassing preventive measures - which included the evacuation of more than
1.7 million persons- and the full cooperation of all citizens, we suffered the loss of
ten persons.

The painful damages to services as well as the loss of social and personal goods
as well as the hardships endured by families that spent many hours without
electricity or water, contributed to strengthen the unity and solidarity of our noble
and heroic people.
The moving scenes of
a little boy picking up
families they had not
Ministry of the Interior

rescuers saving a girl and giving her back to her mother; of
a bust of Jose Marti from the rubble; of students helping
met before; of soldiers from the Armed Forces and the
doing the toughest jobs; of local leaders heading the most

difficult tasks have become all too familiar.

During a visit paid to the area that suffered the most severe devastation. President
Raul Castro issued an appeal which literally read, and I quote: "These have been
tough days for our people who, in only a few hours, have seen how what was built
with great effort has been destroyed by a devastating hurricane. The images
received during the last few hours are too eloquent, just as much as the spirit of
resilience and victory of our people that are reborn in the face of every adversity."

On behalf of the government and the people of Cuba, I sincerely appreciate the
genuine expressions of solidarity and affection expressed by numerous
governments, parliaments, international organizations and representatives of the
civil society.
I would like to convey my profound gratitude for the numerous offers of assistance
that we have received.
Mr. President:

I still keep vivid and emotional memories of the imposing presence of Fidel Castro
Ruz, the Commander in Chief of the Cuban Revolution, and the great validity of the
ideas he expressed before this Assembly.

On behalf of our people and government, I would like to express our gratitude for
the feelings of respect, affection and admiration we have received from all
latitudes.

Mr. President:

On Tuesday last, President Donald Trump came here to convince us that one of
his purposes is to promote the prosperity of nations and persons. But, in the real
world, the wealth owned by eight men altogether is equivalent to the wealth shared
by 3.6 billion human beings, who make up the poorest half of humanity.
In terms of turnover, 69 of the 100 biggest entities of the world are transnationals,
not States. The turnover of the world's ten biggest corporations is higher than the
public revenues earned by 180 countries combined.

Seven hundred million persons live in extreme poverty; 21 million are victims of
forced labor. In 2015, 5.9 million children died of preventable or curable diseases
before reaching the age of 5. A total of 758 million adults are illiterate.
Eight hundred and fifteen million persons suffer from chronic hunger -tens of
millions more than in 2015. Two billion are undernourished. Even if the precarious
decreasing growth rate of recent years rebounds, 653 million persons will continue
to face hunger by the year 2030, and this will not be enough to eradicate hunger by
the year 2050.

There are 22.5 million refugees. Humanitarian tragedies associated to migrants
flows worsen and increase amidst a clearly unjust international economic and
political order.
The construction of walls and barriers as well as the laws and measures adopted
to prevent the waves of refugees and migrants have proved to be cruel and
ineffective. There is a proliferation of exclusive and xenophobic policies that violate
the human rights of millions of persons and fail to solve the problems of
underdevelopment, poverty and armed conflicts, which are the main causes of
migration and refugee claims.
Military expenditures have increased to 1.7 trillion dollars. That reality belies those
who claim that there are not enough resources to eradicate poverty.
However, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development lacks the means for its
implementation, due to the egoism and lack of political will of the United States and
other industrialized countries.

What is the miraculous recipe that President Donald Trump recommends to us in
the absence of the financial flows of the Marshall Plan? Who will contribute the
resources for that? How can this be reconciled with the "America First" idea

advanced by Presidents Reagan and Trump?

President Trump ignores and distorts history and portraits a chimera as a goal to
be pursued. The production and consumption patterns proper of neoliberal
capitalism are unsustainable and irrational and will inexorably lead to the
destruction of the environment and the end of the human species.
Can anyone forget about the consequences of colonialism, slavery, neocolonialism
and imperialism?

Could the several decades of bloody military dictatorships in Latin America be
referred to as an example of a successful capitalism?
Does anyone know of any recipe of neoliberal capitalism that has been better
applied than those which destroyed the Latin American economies in the 1980s?
It is both indispensable and urgent for the United Nations to work in order to
establish a new participatory, democratic, equitable and inclusive international
economic order, as well as a new financial architecture that take into account the

needs and peculiarities of developing countries and the asymmetries that exist in
world trade and finances as a result of centuries of exploitation and plundering.
Industrialized countries have the moral duty, the historical responsibility as well as
sufficient financial and technological means for that.

Not even the rich will enjoy the announced prosperity if climate change is not
stopped.
Cuba regrets the decision taken by the government of the United States, which has
been historically the principal greenhouse gas emitting government in the planet, to
withdraw its country from the Paris Agreement.
In 2016, and for the third consecutive year, the average global temperature
increase records have been broken, which confirms that climate change is a threat
to the survival of humanity and the sustainable development of our peoples.

We reiterate our solidarity with the Small Island Developing States, particularly
from the Caribbean and the Pacific, which are the most affected by climate change
and for which we claim a just, special and differentiated treatment.
Mr. President:

The US government has come here to tell us that, in addition to prosperity, the
other two "beautiful pillars" of international order are sovereignty and security.

We all share the common responsibility to preserve the existence of human beings
in the face of a nuclear threat. An important contribution to the achievement of that
goal was the historical adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons under the auspices of the United Nations, which proscribe the use and
the threat of use of those weapons that have the capacity to annihilate the human
species.

Obviously, the United States strongly opposed this treaty. It announced that it will
invest 700 billion dollars in military expenditures and is developing an extremely
aggressive nuclear and military doctrine based on the threat to use and the use of
force.

NATO member States attempt against international peace and security and
International Law by promoting military interventions and non-conventional wars
against sovereign States.
As was pointed out by the Commander in Chief of the Cuban Revolution, Fidel
Castro Ruz: "Let the philosophy of plunder disappear and the philosophy of war will
also disappear!"
The illegal imposition of unilateral coercive measures and the use of financial,
legal, cultural and communicational instruments to destabilize governments as well
as the denial of peoples' right to self-determination have become customary.

The covert use of ICTs to attack other States increases, while several developed
countries strongly oppose the adoption of international treaties that would regulate
cooperation in order to achieve a safe cyberspace.
The US President manipulates the concepts of sovereignty and security to his
exclusive benefit and to the detriment of all others, including his allies.
The attempt to resort to military threats and force to stop the irreversible world
trend to multi-polarization and polycentrism will seriously jeopardize international
peace and security, which should be defended and preserved through international
mobilization.

The principles of sovereign equality, respect for the territorial integrity and non
interference in the internal affairs of States should be observed. The UN Charter

and International Law admit no re-interpretation.

The United Nations reform should pursue the principal goal of responding to the
pressing needs of peoples and the great disadvantaged majorities. Multilateralism
should be protected and reinforced in the face of the imperialist interests of
domination and hegemony.

The democratization of the Security Council, both in terms of its composition and
its working methods, is a most urgent task.
The strengthening of the General Assembly and the recovery of the functions that
have been usurped from it are indispensable.
Mr. President:

The "patriotism" invoked in the US statement is a perversion of humanism, the love
and loyalty to the homeland and of the enrichment and defense of national and
universal culture. It embodies an exceptionalist and supremacist vision of ignorant
intolerance in the face of diverse political, economic, social and cultural models.

In developed countries, the loss of legitimacy of political systems and parties
worsens and electoral abstentionism is on the rise. Corruption, whether legal or
illegal, has turned into metastasis. So is the extreme case of the so called "special
interests" or corporate payments in exchange for benefits in the country that
spends the highest amount of money in electoral campaigns and where,
paradoxically, a candidate with the lowest number of popular votes can be elected
or entitled to govern with a negligible support by voters.
There has been and increasing and unheard-of use of science and technology to
exercise hegemony, mutilate national cultures and manipulate human behavior, as
is the case of the so called "big data" or psychometry, used for political and
advertising purposes. Seven consortia keep a strict control of whatever is read,
watched or heard in the planet. Technologies are being monopolized. The
governance of digital networks is dictatorial and discriminatory and, despite
appearances, the digital divide between rich and poor countries is increasing.
The opportunities and rights of youths, migrants and workers are curtailed and their
human rights are openly and systematically violated.
The day before yesterday, the US Vice-president, Michael Pence, ridiculously
ignoring the functions of the Security Council and attempting to establish new
prerogatives, said that this organ should modify the composition and methods of
the UN Human Rights Council, which "doesn't deserve its name" because "a clear
majority of the Human Rights Council members fail to meet even the most basic
human rights standards". I suppose he is not including, in this case, his own
country, which will in fact deserve to be included because of its pattern of
systematic violations of human rights, namely the use of torture, arbitrary
detentions and imprisonment -as occurs at the Guantanamo Naval Base-, the
assassination of African Americans by law enforcement agents, the killing of
innocent civilians perpetrated by its troops and the xenophobia and repression
against immigrants -including minors- as well as its scarce adherence to
international instruments.

Mr. President:

We reaffirm our strongest condemnation against all forms and manifestations of
terrorism and reject the double standards in combatting them.

The urgent search for a just and lasting solution to the conflict in the Middle East is
based on the exercise of the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and the existence of a free and independent State within the pre1967 borders, with Eastern Jerusalem as its capital.
The situation in Western Sahara requires an effort in conformity with the UN
resolutions to guarantee the Saharan people's exercise to self-determination and
respect for their legitimate right to live in peace in their own territory.

Cuba reaffirms its support to the search for a peaceful and negotiated solution to
the war in Syria without any foreign interference and with full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The threats to international peace and security resulting from the expansion of
NATO's presence along the Russian borders are on the increase. We continue to
reject the unilateral and unjust sanctions imposed against that country.

We demand respect for the so called Nuclear Agreement signed with the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
We reject the threat to totally destroy the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
the home to 25 million human beings. War is not an option in the Korean
peninsula; it would threaten the existence of hundreds of millions of persons in this
area as well as in neighboring countries; it would lead to a nuclear war of
unpredictable consequences. Only through dialogue and negotiation would it be
possible to achieve a lasting political solution that should take into account the
legitimate concerns of all the parties involved.
We support the total
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, without any foreign interference, with

absolute respect for sovereign equality and territorial integrity of States and strictly
abiding by the principle of not using or threatening to use force.
Mr. President:

New threats are hovering over peace and stability in Latin America and the
Caribbean, in open disrespect for the "Proclamation of Latin America and the
Caribbean as a Zone of Peace" signed in Havana by the Heads of State and
Government of our region in January, 2014, on the occasion of the Second Summit

of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC).
We reiterate what was expressed by President Raul Castro Ruz about the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on July 14 last:

"The aggression and putschist violence against Venezuela harms all of Our
America and only serve the interests of those set on dividing us to exercise their
control over our peoples, unconcerned about causing conflicts of incalculable
consequences in this region, like those we are seeing in different parts of the
world.

"Today we warn that those attempting to overthrow the Bolivarian and Chavista
Revolution through unconstitutional, violent and putschist methods will shoulder a
serious responsibility before history

We strongly reject the military threats against Venezuela, the Executive Order that
designates it as a threat to the national security of the United States and the
unilateral, unjust and arbitrary sanctions applied against it.
We reiterate our unwavering solidarity with the Bolivarian and Chavista
government and people and its civic-military union led by the constitutional
President Nicolas Maduro Moros.

We denounce and condemn the NICA Act Initiative, promoted in the US Congress
as part of an interventionist behavior which is intended to impose an economic
blockade against the people and the government of Nicaragua, to whom we
reiterate our support.
We express our solidarity with former President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, victim of
a political persecution intended to prevent him from running for direct elections by
means of a judicial disqualification. Lula, President Dilma Rousseff, the Workers*
Party and the Brazilian people will always find Cuba on their side.
We

reiterate

our

historical

commitment

with

the

free

determination

and

independence of the Puerto Rican people.
We support the legitimate claim of Argentina for the sovereignty over the Malvinas,
South Georgias and South Sandwich Islands.
Cuba will continue to contribute, to the extent possible, and at the request of the
parties involved, its efforts to achieve a stable and lasting peace in Colombia.
We will uphold our commitment to share our modest achievements with the
peoples of the South, including the efforts of the 41 652 cooperation workers
deployed in 63 countries to struggle for the life and health of human beings.

Mr. President:

On June 16 last, the president of the United States, Donald Trump, announced the
new Cuba policy of his administration, which is a setback in US-Cuba bilateral
relations and undermines the bases established two years ago to advance towards
a new type of relation between our countries, characterized by respect and
equality.
The US Government has decided to tighten the economic, commercial and
financial blockade by imposing new obstacles to the already limited possibilities its
business community had to trade with and invest in Cuba as well as additional
restrictions on US citizens willing to travel to our country.

Those decisions ignore the support from broad sectors in the US, including the
majority of Cuban emigres, to the lifting of the blockade and the normalization of
relations. They only serve the interests of a group of Cuban origin, based in South
Florida, which is an ever more isolated and minoritarian group that insists in
harming Cuba and its people for having decided to defend, at all costs, the right to
be free, independent and sovereign.

Today we reiterate our condemnation of the measures aimed at tightening the
blockade and reaffirm that any strategy intended to destroy the Revolution will fail.
Likewise, we reject the manipulation of the human rights issue against Cuba, which
has a lot to be proud of and has no need to receive lessons from the United States
or anyone.

This time we would like to express our strongest condemnation of the disrespectful,
offensive and interventionist statement against Cuba and the Cuban government,
made three days ago at this rostrum by President Donald Trump. We remind him
that the United States, where flagrant human rights violations are committed, which
raise deep concern among the international community, has no moral authority to
judge my country. We reaffirm that Cuba will never accept any preconditions or
impositions, nor will it ever renounce any of its principles.
Regarding the alleged incidents that would have affected US diplomatic officials in
Havana we categorically affirm that the Cuban government rigorously and seriously
abides by its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations in
relation to the protection and the integrity of all diplomats without any exception,
including those from the United States. Cuba has never perpetrated nor will it ever
perpetrate actions of this sort. Cuba has never allowed nor will it ever allow its

territory to be used by third parties with that purpose.

The Cuban authorities, based on the preliminary results of the priority investigation
that is being carried out with a high technical component, following instructions
from the top level of our government, has taken into account the data contributed
by the US authorities and so far has found no evidence whatsoever that could
confirm the causes or the origin of the health disorders referred to by US diplomats
and their relatives. The investigation to clarify this issue continues, and in order to
be able to arrive to a conclusion, it will be crucial to count on the cooperation of the
US authorities. It would be unfortunate if a matter of this nature is politicized.

As was expressed by the Cuban President Raul Castro Ruz, Cuba is willing to
continue negotiating all pending bilateral issues with the United States, on the
basis of equality and absolute respect for the sovereignty and independence of our
country; and maintaining a respectful dialogue and cooperation in areas of
common interest with the US government.

Cuba and the United States can cooperate and coexist, respecting their differences
and promoting everything that benefits both countries and peoples, but no one
should expect Cuba to make concessions that affect its sovereignty and
independence.
Mr. President:

The Cuban people will not cease in their legitimate claim for the lifting and total
elimination of the economic, commercial and financial blockade and will continue to

denounce the strengthening of that policy. On November

Cuba will once again

present to the United Nations General Assembly the draft Resolution entitled
"Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by
the United States of America against Cuba."

While inequality, the opulence of a few and the marginalization of many are
growing in today's world, the Cuban people will keep up its struggle to achieve the
most just society possible. We will continue to steadily advance down the path of
revolutionary transformations that has been sovereignly chosen by all Cubans to
further improve our socialism.

Thank you, very much.

10

