President of the Czech Republic
Speech at the 72nd session
of UN General Assembly
19 September 2017

Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen,
When I was a relatively young man, I was deeply influenced by two books. One of
them was “The End of History” by Francis Fukuyama and the second one, “The
Clash Civilizations” by Samuel Huntington. Fukuyama was something like
a description of a brave new world, the new Utopia, expecting that every country has
the same political system which is based on liberal parliamentary democracy. A nice
dream but nothing more than a dream. As for Huntington, he was realistic, he was
cynical, he simply predicted gradual conflicts of various types of civilizations. By the
way, in one of his articles in Foreign Affairs he speaks also about bloody waters of
Islam.
So, now we have a new type of civilization. I should call it the anti-civilization which
has emerged during the last two or three decades. The typical feature of this
civilization is the fact that it is based on terror and nothing more than terror. And we
see these terrorist actions all over Europe and not only Europe; we convey
condolences; we express our solidarity with the victims of terrorist actions; we
organize protests and demonstrations, but unfortunately, we still hesitate to fight with
the terrorist anti-civilization with our full power. And I must admit that one year ago,
I criticized here that the United Nations is not able to define the world terrorism. The
situation has changed. It has been seventy years in which it has not been able to
define the world terrorism, but on the other hand I highly appreciate the action of the
Secretary-General and the creation of a new office, the Counter-terrorism Office, and
I understand it as a reasonable step towards the practical solution of the fight against
the world terrorism. You must know that under the umbrella of the United Nations,
there are 38, I repeat, 38 anti-terrorism organizations or institutions. Good heavens,
38! I think that the higher the number of those institutions is, the more the terrorist
movement is flourishing and what we need is the single but strong office fighting
against terrorism and equipped with all necessary measures including the military
force, well, on the base of Article 47 of the Charter of the United Nations. And
I appreciate also the nomination of Mr. Voronkov. I met him yesterday and I am sure
he will be able to solve the problems, which is necessary to fight the world Islamic
terrorism.
Well, let me tackle the second side of the coin – migration. Migration is partially

provoked by terrorist actions, for instance in Syria or in Iraq. But on the other hand,
migration is connected to terrorism because some jihadists are hidden inside the
migration wave. And in Europe and everywhere, they create sleeping units, lonely
wolves and so on. Well, I understand the people who say that we must welcome the
migrants. But my opposition starts from the fact that the massive migration from
African and other countries represents a brain drain. The young, healthy people,
mainly men, who leave their countries, represent the weakening of the potential of
those countries and everybody who welcomes migrants in Europe agrees to the
brain drain and with permanent backwardness of those countries. What we need is
to help those countries with electricity, hospitals, schools, water resources and so on
to stabilize the population in those countries, but not to support the migration.
Ladies and gentlemen, to conclude I would like to say that the fight, the war against
terrorism is to be based on historical optimism, on the belief that we shall overcome
it - some day. In Barcelona, Spanish people said: “We are not afraid!” And Franklin
Roosevelt sometimes proclaimed freedom from fear. That is why I would like to
quote the most beautiful sentence expressing the historical optimism - this sentence
by Martin Luther: “If I knew there would be a doomsday tomorrow I shall go today
and I shall plant an apple tree.”
Thank you so much for your attention.

