Permanent Mission of Eritrea to the United Nations
New York
Check against Delivery

ADDRESS
BY

H.E. Mr. OSMAN SALEH MOHAMMED

MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF
THE STATE OF ERITREA

TO THE

SESSION OF THE

UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK, 23 SEPTEMBER 2017

President of the General Assembly

Mr. Secretary General

Excellencies and distinguished delegates.
It is another year and another session of the UN General Assembly. We meet in the same
assembly hall and deliver our addresses from the same podium.

Yet, no modicum of protocol can mask the gaping divide in our ranks.
We live in an increasingly fragile, unjust and unequal world. A small minority holds the reins of

power and wealth between nations and, for the most part, within nations. The overwhelming
majority of nations and tlieir citizens are without power, without voice, without the means for a
decent life, and often without peace and security. We may be called the United Nations, but the
reality is that we ai*e divided nations and societies.

Despite our deep divisions, however, our destinies are inter-twined in a fundamental way. We
share a common home, a small planet in a vast universe, a tiny boat in a vast ocean. Whatever
calamity happens anywhere in our world - epidemics, poverty, violence, mass displacement,
war, terror- it will eventually catch up with all of us.

We share responsibility to address the fundamental problems of our common world. Certainly,
the mighty and wealthy should shoulder bigger responsibility as they command vast power and
resources. It is only fair that more is asked from tliose to whom much has been given, or more
accurately, those who have appropriated much for themselves. We should unflaggingly remind
them of their obligations and press them, not for charity, but for enlightened self-interest that
understands that might is not permanent and that only shared benefits are sustainable.
We would, however, be gravely mistaken and would have forgotten the lessons of history, if we
pinned all our hopes on the goodwill of those who currently enjoy disproportionate power,
wealth and influence. Power does not readily concede its privileges of its own accord. It resorts
to deception, coercion, pressure, sanctions, violence and war to maintain and if possible increase
its privileges.

The developing countries and the mai-ginalized peoples of the globe stand to gain most from a
more peaceful, secure, just and equal world. They owe it to themselves and to coming
generations to build solidarity and to steadfastly strive and work and innovate for a better world.
It is their duty to ensure freedom, dignity and prosperity to their peoples.
Excellencies,

Africa remains the most mai-ginalized of all continents.

Undoubtedly, there is some progress, more in some countries than others. But talk of an African

Renaissance, of fastest growing economies is misplaced and premature. We should not flatter
ourselves, or allow others to flatter us.

Africa remains a producer and small-bit exporter of primary products. It retains minimum
revenue from this export, with foreign companies getting the lion's share. Processing of primary
products, value-addition, industrialization, teclinology development barely exist. Afncan
economies, physical and social infrastructure, institutional and governance structures, peace and
security architectures remainundeveloped.

Yet, Africa boasts tremendous human and natural resources; indeed, over 60% of global natural
resources lie in Africa. It is only when Africa's economies, the quality of its infrastructure, the
standards of its health and educational institutions, the level of its artistic, scientific and

technological products, the effectiveness of its institutions and enterprises, and more importantly
the quality of life of its citizens, reflect more accurately its great potential that we can rightly
speakof Africa taking its rightful place in the world.

We should safeguard independence and sovereignty, fight ethnic polarization and rampant
corruption, chart our own paths, develop bold and imaginative policies that suit our conditions,
rely mainly on our own resources, and build an Africa that meets the aspirations of its people and
makes valuable contributions to humanity.
Excellencies,

Eritrea is a young nation, strategically located and with significant human andnatural resources.

Itjoined the community of independent nations a quarter of a century ago by dint of its people's
long, 30 year long, struggle for freedom and self-determination, fought and won against
tremendous odds.

As an independent nation, it has faced the full brunt of an unfair and unjust international order. It
has faced demonization, ostracization, sanctions and armed aggression.

This sustained external hostility caused much harm to Eritrea and its people. It slowed down
Eritrea's progress, but it was not able to stop it. It could not shake the resolve of the Eritrean
people and their government.

Eritrea was severely tested. It emerged intact, more determined, experienced, and in many ways
stronger. It is peaceful, stable, secure and hai'monious, a haven of stability in a turbulent
neighborhood.

Eritrea is, quietly and without fanfare, engaged in comprehensive nation-building. It is pursuing
policies and taking concrete measures to strengthen the unity and hannony of its people, foster
their political participation and unleash their energies and talents. It is laying the ground for

broad-based and sustainable economic development. It is step by step putting in place modern
infrastructure. It is working to ensure that all its citizens get good access to nutritious food, clean
water, electricity, shelter, transport, communications, health and educational services as well as
cultural, sports and recreational facilities.
Eritrea has also embarked on a massive, water and soil conservation, as well as an afforestation

program, as part of its comprehensive plan to enhance the environment and fight climate change.
Eritrea is confident it will meet the Sustainable Development Goals ahead of time.

In its ambitious development program, Eritrea avoids dependency, and relies first and foremost
on its people and on its domestic resources. At the same time, it welcomes and encourages
cooperation and partnership, with a focus on trade and investment.
Eritrea also seeks to make a modest contribution to peace, stability and cooperation in its wider
region, which includes the Nile Basin, the Horn of Africa, the Red Sea Basin and the Gulf. It has
successfully fought and continues to fight radicalization, extremism and terrorism on its own and
in cooperation with its neighbors.

Eritrea extends its hands of friendship and solidarity to all peoples and nations who strive to
build their countries and contribute to a fairer, more just and equal world.
Eritrea takes the initiative to engage with all countries, including those who differ with it.

Eritrea strongly believes that its political, economic, social and diplomatic path would be
smoother and easier if the external obstacles that have been on its path were removed. It
therefore once again calls on the United Nations Security Council to lift the unfair and unjust
sanctions imposed on it for the past nine years. There is no justification for them to continue and
they do not serve any useful purpose.

Another impediment in front of Eritrea, indeed in front of the whole Horn of Africa region, is the
15-year old occupation of sovereign Eritrean territory by Ethiopia. Eritrea calls on the Security
Council to ensure the end of this flagrant violation of international law and several UN
resolutions.

I thank you.

