PERMANENT MISSION OF GREECE TO THE UNITED NATIONS
866 2-a Avenue, 13th Floor. New York, NY 10017-2905
e-maih gr_del,un@mfa.gr

www.mfa.gr/un

Seventy-Second Session

of the General Assembly of the United Nations

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Nikos Kotzias

Minister for Foreign Affairs

of the HellenicRepubhe

NEW YORK
Friday, September 22, 2017

Chec(c againsÿ

Mr President,
Mr Secretary General,
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Mr President,
I would like first of all to wish every success to the new Secretary General Mr Guterres and
to reaffirm our full support to his work.
Allow me also to congratulate you on both your election to the office of President of this
72nd General Assembly and the choice of this year's main topic.
Our world is changing rapidly today. We are going through the second machine era. An
era when machines no longer constitute the extension of physical strength, but rather
produce spiritual wealth and knowledge. Machines that are faster and smaller, yet have an
immense impact on our daily lives. On the way we work and produce, On the way we
communicate and interact. This trend can be described as the fourth industrial revolution.
This new era brings with it innovations and advantages, but also challenges, especially for
states. Challenges that they need to face effectively if they are to survive in today's
complex international reality.
States have to show resilience and meet the needs of their people for more human rights,
communication, growth and innovation.

They have to evolve. But their evolution is certaintly linked to the evolution of the
Organization itself. Will the UN be able to follow these developments and adapt to the new
emerging reality?
In the light of this double adaptation, this time is extremely critical and requires the
promotion of reforms that will make the UN capable of remaining relevant in an ever
changing world, one that is very different from the one that existed in 1945.
If the UN is to keep its capacity to uphold its mandate, it also needs to evolve and meet the
challenges before us.
As insecurity and instabilitystill abound in large parts of our world, Greece is formulating a
multidimensional foreign policy with a view to actively contributing to peace through putting
forward concrete ideas at international fora and regional organizations, stability through
political initiatives.
More specifically, we favor the prospect of broadening the agenda of the EU-UN
institutionalized dialogue and cooperation to an extensive array of issues of global
concern.

As a vision, we all want to see a world free of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
In this framework, we strongly condemn this latest test and North Korea's ongoing illegal
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes which seriously endanger regional and
international peace and security.

Contemplating developments in disarmament and non-proliferation over the past year, I
believe that it is imperative, now morethan ever, to seek avenues of dialogue with the
participation of nuclear states. This could be the vehicle to bridge the. gap between the
step-by-step approach towards nuclear disarmament and the immediate non-verifiable
total ban.

Mr President,
Situated close to what continues to be an extremely turbulent region like the Middle East
and parts of North Africa, Greece is a pillar of stability.
In this context, we have recently undertaken many initiatives, such as the Rhodes
Conference for Security and Stability and the Athens Conference on Religious and Cultural
Pluralism and Peaceful Co-existence in the Middle East, as well as the newly established
Ancient Civilizations Forum (ACForum), which was held the last time only yesterday, here
in New York.

The Rhodes Conference focuses on a positive agenda of cooperation between 20
European and Arab countries of the Eastern Mediterranean, with the aim of fostering
stability and security in the region.
I would also like to mention that alongside Cyprus, in the framework of promoting peace
and stability in the region of the Eastern Mediterranean, we have established a number of
trilateral forms of cooperation which include Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine.
Our main objective is to develop a positive, manifold agenda of cooperation in international
affairs, focusing on synergies and joint activities, especially through culture as one of the
main drivers of soft power in international relations, and other areas of cooperation, such
as trade, education and research.

Enhancing regional cooperation in the Balkans is the core thinking behind another Greek
initiative, namely that of Quadrilateral meetings between Ministers of Greece, Albania,
Bulgaria and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, launched in Thessaloniki in April
2016.
The four countries, with a view to responding to the refugee crisis effectively and in line
with European democratic values and principles, will focus, during their upcoming meeting
in October, on identifying ways for better interaction on issues such as return operations,
exchange of information, tackling smuggling, human trafficking, terrorism, organized crime
and energy networks.

Mr President,

The Syrian war has taken a great toll in human lives, and millions have been displaced.
The.cessation of hostilities is sine qua non for progress of political negotiations. Greece
sees no alternative other than a political solution to this crisis. We fully support an inclusive
political dialogue in Geneva under UN auspices.
The lsraeli-Palestinian conflict remains a constant threat to regional stability and security.
The current situation on the ground is not sustainable. We support the two-State solution,
meaning the creation of a sovereign and independent State of Palestine living in peace
and security alongside the State of Israel while responding to Israel's longstanding quest
for security.

On Libya, Greece attaches particular importance to the international efforts to stabilize the
country, Greece strongly believes that there is no military solution to the Libyan crisis. We
support all efforts towards peace and security.
Mr President,
Terrorism remains one of the major global challenges we are faced with, The significant
progress witnessed recently in the fight against DAESH demands special mention.
Strengthening international cooperation among all relevant actors and improving
information exchange constitute key elements in tackling the movement of foreign fighters,
while at the same time it is essential to address the root causes of violent extremism.
Greece participates actively in the common anti-terrorism fight.
In the context of our efforts to prevent terrorists from exploiting any resources for their
actions, we particularly support international efforts aiming at promoting a concerted
international action against illegal trade of antiquities and cultural artifacts.
Mr. President,

We consistently pursue friendly relations and enhanced cooperation with all our
neighboring States as a means of promoting stability and prosperity for all.
In the Western Balkans, Greece remains a firm supporter of the EU Enlargement
Policy.
The rise of nationalistic rhetoric in the region raises grave concerns. We wish to underline
that actions and statements that undermine good neighborly relations should be avoided
by all means.

Greece maintains a friendly approach to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,

........ i .......

The Greek initiative for designing and implementing the bilateral Confidence Building
Measures has strengthened our relations, facilitating efforts for addressing more sensitive
matters, such as the pending issue of the name of our neighboring country.
In this respect, Greece will continue to work systematically to reach a mutually
acceptable solution to the name issue. Our position is clear: a mutually accepted name,
erga omnes.

Accordingly, progress in Greek-Turkish relations can only be built upon the full
respect of international taw, including the International Law of the Sea. We have
repeatedly pointed out that good neighborly relations cannot be served by persistent
challenging of Greece's sovereignty and sovereign rights by a neighbor.
Regarding the Cyprus Issue, our objective is summed up in a concept that the UN
Secretary General adopted during the International Conference on Cyprus: to make
Cyprus a "normal state". A sovereign and independent state, free of foreign occupation
troops, external guarantees and intervention "rights".

The International Conference on Cyprus held in Switzerland this year, was
unfortunately closed last July, without producing agreement, because the Turkish and
Turkish Cypriot sides were the only parties in the Conference who did not share the goal of
the "normal state" concept.

We are prepared to continue discussing the key international issue of Security and
Guarantees, whenever Turkey demonstrates a clear willingness to resume negotiations on
the basis of UN Security Council Resolutions, as well as within the framework of
parameters set down by the UN Secretary General in Crans Montana.
Mr President,
In the area of civil and political rights, we actively support the fight against racism and any
other forms of discrimination including those based on religious, gender, sexual and any
other grounds. In this vein, Greece, prioritizing the safety of journalists and media workers,
especially in conflict areas, is going to submit the relevant thematic resolution during the
current Third Committee session of the UN General Assembly.
Furthermore, my Country in the framework of Human Rights Council leads an initiative by
successfully submitting a resolution on "Promoting Human Rights through sport and the
Olympic Ideal".
We remain committed to the protection of human rights in all policies addressing
large movements of migrants, with particular attention paid to the specific needs of
migrants in vulnerable situations, including children.
We also believe that setting this framework right is more than ever important in order
to grant protection to those in need of it, to fight against human trafficking and migrant

smuggling and to return people not entitled to international protection, while at the same
time tackling the root causes of migration through effective cooperation with countries of
origin and transit. Finally, social and economic inclusion of legal migrants is equally
important and deserves our fullest attention.
Greece has reaffirmed its commitment to ensuring full and effective implementation of
the Political Declaration of New York and its annexes, which were adopted during the High
Level Meeting on the margins of the 71st UN General Assembly, and, in parallel, it has
stressed its commitment to work in the context of the Global Compact for Migration that is
to be concluded by 2018.

Mr President,

I wish to assure you that, as a founding member of this Organization, Greece will lend
it its unfaifing support as the UN tries to rise up to the task of creating a more peaceful and
prosperous future with justice and solidarity for all and especially for the next generations.

Thank you,

