STATEMENT
BY

HONOURABLE ELVIN NIMROD
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF GRENADA
AT
THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE SEVENTY-SECOND
REGULAR SESSION
OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

23 SEPTEMBER 2017
NEW YORK

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

PERMANENT MISSION OF GRENADA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

685 THIRD AVENUE, SUITE 1101 " NEW YORK, NY 10017
TEL: (212) 599"-0301 " FAX: (212! 599-1540

Mr. President,

Distinguished Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen

I bring warmest greetings from Grenada's Prime Minister, Dr. The Rtÿ

Honourable Keith C. Mitchell.

Mr. President, Prime Minister Mitchell believes in the work of the General
Assembly and is only absent because he believes that as Chair of
CARICOM his presence in the region allows his colleague prime ministers
to travel to New York to plead the cases of their hurricane-stricken
countries..

Our hearts and prayers go out to all the victims in our Caribbean region,
Mexico and across the world, who are presently suffering adverse effects of

climate change and natural disasters. Within the last few weeks, our fellow
OECS and Caribbean Small Island Developing States of Barbuda and the
Commonwealth of Dominica were ravaged by hurricanes Irma and Maria
causing near total destruction and the loss of many lives. Our hearts also
go out to the people of Cuba, with whom our region shares a special bond
of friendship.

Mr. President, permit me to implore the international community to
recognize, without delay, our responsibility to assist all those affected by
natural disasters.

Mr. President, I join those before me in congratulating you on your election
as president of this august international body. I am confident in your
stewardship and assure you of my delegation's Cooperation and support.

Mr. President, I also take this opportunity to commend your predecessor,

Ambassador Peter Thomson of Fiji, for his able stewardship of the 71st
General Assembly.

I also wish to thank both you and Secretary-General Guterres for your
leadership and willingness to serve as guardians of the spirit of our UN
Charter. Mr. President, I believe there is value in repeating your astute and
entirely relevant observation that the UN Charter makes only 5 references
to "war", while "peace" was referenced 47 times.

Mr. President, over the next few minutes, ! will offer Grenada's

interpretation of what it means to "Strive for peace and a decent life for all
on a sustainable planet".

Mr. President, allow me to say a few words on Climate Change. Certainly,
based on recent activities in the Atlantic, we just cannot dispute that the
climate is changing. In fact, 97 percent or more of actively publishing
climate scientists agree that climate-warming trends over the past century
are extremely likely due to human activities.

For those that question the veracity of this science, the cluster of 'extreme'

weather events over the last few weeks ought to suffice in sounding the
alarm.

Mr. President, extreme weather events disproportionately affect our planet's

most vulnerable. Grenada therefore advocates for special attention to be
paid to our women, children, elderly and disabled.

As we assess the physical damage caused by these disasters, let us
never overlook the psychological toll on survivors.

Mr. President, we reiterate Grenada's commitment to the Paris Agreement.

Speaking in his capacity as Chair of the World Bank's Small States Forum
in June of this year, Grenada's Prime Minister lamented the withdrawal of
key partners from this agreement. We do not know these partners to be
unreasonable and, therefore, we encourage them to see their own self-

interest within the framework of a successful Paris Agreement.

Mr. President, the Government of Grenada has adopted an ambitious 'Blue
Growth' agenda to take advantage of our vast maritime territory and its
countless resources. Grenada aims to be the beacon of sustainable

development for maritime states around the world. Our relatively small
size makes this an interesting and achievable project. Our blue growth

master plan offers many opportunities for collaboration.

Mr. President, the Caribbean Community, CARICOM, has emphasized the
need to advance measures to develop sustainable ocean-based
economies in the Caribbean. The word 'Caribbean' remits us to beautiful

beaches like the world famous Grand Anse beach in Grenada. Our recent
endeavours aim to use our maritime waters in a sustainable manner
governed by robust policies in our people's interest.

Mr. President, I previously alluded to the many variables that influence the
sustainability of our planet. Small states like Grenada and other CARICOM
countries have to battle with threats to our access to financial markets. In
March of this year, the IMF published a report titled "Recent trends in
correspondent banking relationships" (CBRs) that highlights some of the
challenges facing financial institutions and governments of small states.
Observing that the number of CBRs has decreased, the IMF anticipates a
negative effect on global trade and economic activity. In the specific case of
Grenada and the rest of CARICOM, the disruption of international
payments and capital inflows, as well as the high cost of compliance with
the OECD-driven international tax agenda, were all underscored at the
Ninth General Meeting between the Caribbean Community and the UN
System in July of this year.

Mr. President, added to the threat of lost correspondent banking
relationships, we also have to deal with the unilateral and often unfounded
blacklisting of our institutions as money launderers and our countries as tax
havens.

Mr. President, Grenada has worked tirelessly to sign tax information
exchange agreements (TIEAs) and has signed 14 countries such
agreements since 2010; the agreement with Canada in July of this year
being the most recent.

Within CARICOM, Grenada's proactive

approach and sense of

international duty is not the exception.

It pains us as policy-makers when we expend our limited resources to
comply with rules only to face arbitrary punishments when we are quite
evidently doing our best. There are no easy answers to these challenges,

but I urge our partners to desist from draconian approaches to these
matters when dealing with vulnerable developing nations. Let us please
favor reasonable and respectful dialogue before we de-risk and blacklist.
In a similar vein, Grenada supports General Assembly Resolution 70/5,
which calls for an end to the economic, commercial, and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba. We also believe
that renewed dialogue may augur well for the discovery of a mutually
acceptable way forward for both parties.

Lastly, on finance, Mr. President, I am proud to report that Grenada's

structural adjustment programme has been widely successful. In May of
this year, the IMF reported that, and I quote:
"Grenada has continued with steadfast implementation of reforms and
made progress toward achieving the key program goals."

Through the leadership and wisdom of our Prime Minister and the
sacrifices that the Grenadian people have made, Grenada's economy and
institutions are today on solid footing. Mr. President, Grenada's thriving
economy today is proof that the words 'structural adjustment' are not
inherently bad. Investment, both foreign and local, is at the highest levels in
recent years. We are cautious to declare victory, Mr. President. However,

we are confident, that we are headed in the right direction.

Mr. President, Human Rights should never be politicized. I believe that all
7 billion of our planet's Humans possess certain inalienable Human
Rights. Mr. President, the UN Declaration on Human Rights (1948) is
unambiguous. And so, if we allow ourselves to be guided by Article 1 of the
Declaration, issues of racism and other forms of discrimination will have
NO place in our societies.

Our recent constitutional referendum offered a renewed view of the rights
and freedoms of the Grenadian people.

Grenada thanks the United Nations for coordinating the provision of
essential technical support throughout the exploration of constitutional
reform.

Mr. President, Grenada continues to work with our international partners in
the interest of international security. Mr. President, Grenada is active and

compliant on numerous matters of international security. Grenada views the
situation on the Korean peninsula with great trepidation and our position on
these matters is clear and to that effect, the Cabinet of Ministers has
recently approved the signing of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons. The proliferation of nuclear weapons, is inherently destructive
and serves NO useful purpose for humanity. The mere existence of these
weapons is unacceptable. Let us never forget the suffering of the victims of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Mr. President, Grenada, therefore, urges its

friends and allies to desist from all development and testing of these
weapons.

Mr. President, 105 BILLION US Dollars spent each year on nuclear
weapons. That amounts to $12 million dollars an hour. If we are willing to
make the shift from destruction to sustainable construction, the people of
Barbuda, Dominica Cuba and all SIDS will be forever grateful.

Mr. President, Grenada remains preoccupied by recent political and social
developments in Venezuela. In his capacity as Chair of CARICOM,
7

Grenada's Prime Minister has offered CARICOM's help in mediating
discussions between the Government and the Opposition. Necessarily,

Grenada's approach must be impartial. Grenada will not attempt to dictate
terms to either side. What we seek is to encourage meaningful dialogue on
the premise that the Venezuelan people can come together to safeguard
the future of all the Venezuelan people. In the meantime, Grenada believes
in the art of diplomacy and the principle of respect for State sovereignty
and the right of all people to self-determination. The onus is squarely on the
Government and the opposition to ensure that Venezuelans do not lose
hope.

Mr. President, during a lecture series on reparatory justice Sir. Hilary

Beckles, Vice-Chancellor of the University of the West Indies, relayed the
story of his upbringing on a sugar plantation at the University of Oxford. He
recounted consuming handfuls of sugar in lieu of proper sustenance, and

the scientifically proven impact that such practices have had on the former
slaves that now inhabit Caribbean countries.

Mr. President, assigning culpability for the prevalence of diabetes,
hypertension, and childhood obesity is a matter for another forum. That
said, Grenada struggles with high rates of non-communicable diseases that
put immense pressure on our limited fiscal space.

This year marks the 10th anniversary of the signing of the landmark

CARICOM Heads of Government Port-of-Spain Declaration on non-

communicable diseases (NCDs) and while some progress has been made
in reducing NCDs, Dr. Alafia Samuels, Director of the George Alleyne
Chronic Disease Research Centre, University of the West Indies states the
following as it relates to CARICOM and NCDs, and I quote:

"Our soda consumption is the highest in the world. In some countries more

than 30% of young people are overweight or obese. Our diabetes rates are
double global rates and in some populations up to 50% of us are living with
high blood pressure. It is clear that we need to accelerate our response."

Mr. President, I am sure you would appreciate that the statistics just
presented are not flattering to your call for a "decent life for all". The
Caribbean region has the highest burden of non-communicable diseases
(NCDs) in the Americas. We therefore urge key allies to continue to partner
with us as we attempt to correct this unfortunate reality.

Mr. President, Grenada has made important progress in controlling the
spread of HIV/AIDS. Only 0.3% of our population presently lives with this
disease. The work of Grenada's National Infectious Disease Control Unit
(NIDCU) and our health care practitioners and policy-makers must be
highly commended for their work in this regard. That work, however, is
greatly supported by international assistance that is being depleted without
foreseeable replenishment as it already has in some Caribbean countries.
9

Grenada thanks the Global Fund, the U.S. President's Emergency Plan for

AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), PAHO and the German Development Bank (KfW)
for their assistance. I urge donors to be flexible in their relief responses. We

cannot wait on data while our people suffer. Mr. President the data will
come eventually but. in the meantime lives, families, communities are at
stake.

Mr. President, Grenada's commitment to ending corruption is clear and

long-standing. In 2015 Grenada acceded to the UN Convention against
Corruption. Thirteen years prior, in 2002, Grenada ratified the InterAmerican Convention against Corruption. We have since created the Office
of the Integrity Commission, an independent body, to end the scourge of
corruption.

Mr. President, I close with the assurancethat Grenada believes in the UN
System. I have had the honour of representing the people of Grenada,
Carriacou and Petite Martinique on several occasions at thisnoble
institution. As I retire from active political life, I am optimistic that the
window is still open for us to leave a peaceful, inhabitable, and prosperous
planet for future generations.

The challenges of our time are dynamic and continuous and we would be
remiss to put anything but our planet first.

10
i

J
i

I thank you/

11

