Cooperative Republic ofGuyana

of
His Excellency Brigadier David Granger
President of the Cooperative Republic o/Guyana

to the 72"d Session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations
2017.09.20

Salutations

Mr President,

Mr Secretary-General,

Distinguished Heads of State and Government,

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.

The Cooperative Republic of Guyana extends its congratulations to His Excellency
Miroslav Lajcak on his election to the Presidency of the General Assembly. We are

confident, Mr. President, that under your guidance, progress will be made in advancing

the international agenda andin realising the theme ofthisyear's session oftheAssembly
- ""Focusing on people: striving for peace and a decent lifefor all on a sustainable
planet."

Guyana expresses its appreciation for the sterling performance of your predecessor.

Ambassador Peter Thompson of Fiji for his stewardship of the Assembly over the past
year.

I take this opportunity, also, to congratulate the distinguished Secretary-General, Mr
Antonio Guterres, on his election last year. I wish him a successful tenure.

People, peace and the planet

Mr President,

Nothing is more important, in this General Debate, than that alldelegates should respect
the relevant theme - Focusing onpeople: Strivingfor peace and a decentlifefor all on
a sustainable planet.
People

First, the theme enjoins us to focus on people - people of all countries and in all
circumstances. The theme is about the human condition - of people in states that are
largeand small;rich and poor;strong and weak. Thetheme is about humanit/s condition
everywhere on earth.

The world faces several, serious, humanitarian crises. Children, in too many parts of the
world, still die from preventable diseases or go to bed hungry. Women, in some places,
are denied equal opportunities to enjoy a 'good life'. The gap between the world's rich and
its poor remains unacceptably wide. Conflicts, within states, have spawned international
refugee crises which have resulted in millions being displaced from their homelands.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) represent our collective desire and

determination to eradicate hunger and poverty from our planet while promoting equal
opportunities in education, employment and social justice for both men and women. The
adoption of the SDGs has catalysed our aspirations for a better world into concrete and
forward-looking actions and objectives.

The respective'Goals' seek to promote respect for the inherent dignity of people and thenrights as human beings. The advancement of these 'Goals', however, is being obstructed
bythe incidence ofhuman rights violations and the involuntarymigrationof peoplefrom
their homelands and by terrorism and warfare.

The challenge to the UN is to resolve to reinforce respect for the rights of citizens within
the governance structures of our member states.

Planet

Second, a sustainable planet is humanity's ultimate patrimony. Nothing is more vital to

people's survival. We have been indifferent too long to the need to protect the planet and
now its sustainability is threatened on many fronts.
Climate change is not a fiction or the invention of a few extremists. The small island states

of the Caribbean and parts of North America have felt the devastating fuiy of a series of

hurricanes - Harvey, Irma, Jose, Katia, Lee and Maria- to whose frequency and ferocity
mankind has contributed through the reckless exploitation of earth's resources.

Hurricane Irma was a deadly, destructive portent of the extreme vulnerability and
fragility of the small island developing and low-lying coastal states of the Caribbean.

Guyana is playing its part, within the limits of its resources, to provide relief to affected
populations in sister Caribbean states.

Guyana signed and celebrated the Paris Agreement on climate change last year in this
Assembly. We renew our commitment to its goals this year. This is demonstrated most

positively in Guyana's pioneeringrole in global environmental stewardship.
Guyana, in 1989 - three years before the Rio Conference of 1992 - had the foresight to
enter into an environmental covenant with the international communityby dedicating
360,000 hectares of its rainforest:

"...to develop, demonstrate and make available to Guyana and the
international community, systems, methods and techniques for the
sustainable utilization ofthe multiple resources ofthe tropicalforests and the
conservation ofbiological diversity,."

Guyana, twenty years after that international initiative, entered an agreement with the
Kingdom of Norway:

"...to work together toprovide the world with a relevant, replicable model
of how Reducing Emissions and Forest Degradation, plus conservation
and sustainableforest management (REDD+) can align the development
objectives offorest countries with the need to combat climate change."

Guyana is part of the 'Guiana Shield', one of the world'slast remainingblocks of pristine
rainforest. The 'Shield' is the source of 15 per cent of the world's freshwater reserves. The
'Shield's' biodiversity provides ecosystem services such as food, freshwater and medicinal

products. It provides environmental services such as the regulation of the water cycle,
water quality and pollination. The 'Shield's' forests capture and store carbon, thereby
mitigating the greenhouse effect. The 'Shield' is essential to lifeon the planet.
Guyana callson the United Nations to help protect and preserve the 'Guiana Shield' as a
global resource for the survival and sustainability of our planet.
Peace

Third, 'striving for peace' has been the principal purpose and preoccupation of this
organization throughout its existence. A good life for the world's peoples and the
sustainable use of the planet's resources are predicated on peace withjustice, including
justice within and between states. The world is weary of war.
'Striving for peace' must be humanity's ceaseless quest. The United Nations is the

paramount global instrument of peace. It has a vital role to play in ensuring respect for
international law through the International Court of Justice and the Security Council.

'Striving for peace' must aim at resolving long-standing inter-state conflicts. Guyana, in

this regard, supports the call for the reform of the Security Council to give even greater
voice to developing countries.
We iterate our support for a two-state solution to the Palestine-Israeli conflict. We affirm

the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland and to a dignified existence.

We demand the withdrawal of the injurious economic embargo against the Caribbean
island of Cuba. The embargo frustrates that state's right to development.

'Striving for peace' and the right to development have been Guyana's deepest concern
since Independence in 1966.

I addressed this Honourable Assembly last September, explaining the danger we have
been facing on our borders as a consequence of the territorial claims of our western
neighbour - the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. I laid before the world's nations the
peril Guyana was enduring on its borders at the hands of Venezuela.
Venezuela's claim to Guyana's territory, however, has not diminished or been diverted.
Guyana remains imperilled. Disturbing developments within Venezuela have attracted

the world's attention and roused the concerns of many of us over the privations of its
people.
The Caribbean people wish for the Caribbean to be a Zone of Peace. The Venezuelan claim
to Guyana's territorial integrity, however, would be a threat to that zone. Venezuela is

more than four times the size of Guyana. Venezuela, however, claims two-thirds of
Guyana's territory including our maritime space.

We depend on our territorial and maritime resources for development and for the release
of our people from poverty.

The Venezuelan claim persists after fifty-one years of Independence. An eminent

international Arbitral Tribunal provided 'a full, perfect and final settlement' 118 years ago
in 1899. Venezuela denounced that Arbitral Award in 1962 at the Decolonisation

Committee of this Assembly as British Guiana strove for its Independence.

Guyana warns the world, through this Assembly, that peace will be at stake in our region

if justice does not become ascendant, not only within Venezuela, but also in respect to its
border controversy with Guyana.
Four UN Secretaries-General have been seized of the Venezuelan claims. The choice has

become one between just and peaceful settlement in accordance with international law,

and a Venezuelanposture of attrition that is increasinglymore blustering and militaristic.
In this matter, protraction is the enemy of resolution and the ally of sustained conflict.

Fortunately, as they indicated publicly, former Secretary General Ban Ki Moon and

current Secretary General Antonio Guterres have decided that, under the 1966 Geneva
Agreement, if by the end of the year 2017 significant progress has not been made toward

arriving at a full agreement for the settlement of the controversy, the International Court

of Justice will be the next means of peaceful settlement, unless Guyana and Venezuela
jointly request otherwise.

Guyana has been working assiduously with the Secretary General's Personal
Representative. Guyana looks to the international community to ensure that Venezuela

is not allowedto thwart the processes ofjudicial settlement whichare the clear and agreed
path to peace and justice.
Nations, United

The people of the world yearn "to fulfil their potential in dignity and equality and in a

healthy environment" - an attainable objective of the Sustainable Development Goals
endorsed by the United Nations.

Peace for the world's peoples is the mandate ofthe United Nations. Peace can be achieved

by addressing the world's humanitarian crises, promoting justice within and between
nations and resolving long-standing conflicts between states.

Planet earth can provide a 'goodlife' for all.The planet can be protected from the ravages
of climate change and the reckless damage to its ecology and biodiversity.
United, the nations gathered here can fulfil the promise of the UN Charter and the theme

of the General Assembly to focus on people, to strive for peace and to protect the planet.
I thank you.

