CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Address by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe

at the Seventy-Second Session of the United Nations General
Assembly

NewYork,Wednesday, September 20,2017
[Provisional translation]

1.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen,

Today, I had intended first of all to tellyou of the sincerity withwhichJapan is
implementing the SDGs. I also had hoped to introduce to you the innovative ways
by which we have been fostering public awareness withinJapan towards those
goals.

I wanted to tell you why the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative, or "We-Fi," is
important to me personally as well as to the Government ofJapan.
I have been saying we will make universal health coverage part of the "Japan
brand."We will hold a major conference this December in Tokyo taking up UHC
as the theme.

The list of things I would have liked to raise here is long indeed - our
contributions towards the rule of law; our determination to undertake the Paris

Agreement in a steadfast manner; our policy of addressing global infrastructure
demand through quality investments.

Moreover,what Japan wants to safeguard in every respect is the free, liberal, open
international order and multilateral frameworks.

The world certainly holds high expectations towards the UN as the flagbearer
upholding these. That is exactly why the Security Council should be reformed
without delay, in response to the demands of the times.

Japan will strive together with its friends to achieve these reforms. I had intended
to state that Japan^ abiding determination is to play an active role for world peace
as a permanent member of the Security Council.
However, I have no choice but to focus my remarks on a single issue, that of North
Korea.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

2.
Mr. President, distinguished colleagues,

North Korea conducted a nuclear test on September the 3id.Whether or not it was

a hydrogen bomb test, its scale far exceeded that of previous tests.
Both before and after that, on August 29, and again on September 15 before the
ink on Resolution 2375, passed by the Security Council to impose sanctions on
North Korea, was even dry. North Korea laimched missiles.
Both of these were launched to fly over Japan and make a display of their cruising
range.

The gravity of this threat is unprecedented. It is indisputably a matter of urgency.
North Korea is attempting to dismiss with a smirk the efforts towards disarmament
we have assiduously undertaken over the years.

The non-proliferation regime is about to suffer a serious blow from its most
confident disrupter ever.

Mr. President, distinguished colleagues.

This recent crisis is of an altogether different dimension qualitatively than those
we have eluded every time some dictator has attempted to acquire weapons of
mass destruction.

North Korea's nuclear weapons either already are, or are on the verge of
becoming, hydrogen bombs.

Their means of delivery will sooner or later be ICBMs.
Over the more than 20 years since the end of the Cold War, where and when else,
and to what dictators, have we allowed such self-indulgence? As it turns out, it is
only towards North Korea that this has been allowed.
That is the reality we find before us.

And, it was absolutely not a lack of dialogue that gave rise to this situation.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

3.
Dialogue dissuaded North Korea from pursuing its nuclear ambitions. Dialogue
has afforded many of us the relief that the world had been saved from a crisis.
Believing thus, many of us have felt relieved, well, not just once, but twice.
The first time was in the early 1990s.

At the time, the threat that North Korea imposed amounted to little more than

openly displaying its withdrawal from the IAEA and other inspection regimes.
However, tensions were felt by those of us who surmised the intent of that.

After many twists and turns, in October 1994,what is known as the "Agreed
Framework" was realized between the US. and North Korea.

Under the framework. North Korea would be made to abandon its nuclear plans.

In exchange, we would provide incentives to North Korea.

Towards that end, Japan, the U.S., and the ROK formed the Korean Peninsula
Energy Development Organization, or "KEDO," in March the followingyear.
Taking KEDO as the implementing agent, we pledged to build and hand over two
light-water reactors (LWRs) to North Korea and also provide 500 thousand tons of
heavy fuel oil annually as a stopgap measure for its energy demand.
This was all carried out accordingly. However, as time went by, it came to be
known that North Korea had been continuing steadily with its uranium
enrichment.

From the start. North Korea had never intended to abandon its nuclear ambitions.
This had become readily apparent to aU.

After 2002, seven years after it was founded, KEDO suspended its operations.

During that period, it can be said that North Korea defrauded the U.S., the ROK,
and Japan of assistance.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Countries that recognized value in the KEDO framework of providing incentives
to change North Korea's actions gradually came to join KEDO —the European
Union, New Zealand, Australia, Canada, Indonesia, Chile, Argentina, Poland, the

Czech Republic and Uzbekistan.

North Korea betrayed the good faith of all those KEDO members.

As one of the organization's founding members, Japan had pledged to give a
non-interest loan to KEDO and had fulfilled roughly 40 percent of that.

The pledged amount was 1 billion US dollars, with about 400 million fulfilled.

4The second crisis occurred in 2002 when KEDO suspended its operations and

North Korea,saying it would end the fi:eezeon its nuclear-related facilities,
expelled IAEA inspectors.

The concern was again that North Korea was continuing its \jranium enrichment.
And again we chose the path of defusing the situation through dialogue.
North Korea, China, and Russia joined the three founding members of KEDO,

Japan, the U.S., and the ROK, to launch the Six-PartyTalks.That was in August 2003.
Subsequently, after two years of twists and turns, through the summer of 2005 into
the fall, the Six Parties once reached an agreement, resulting in the release of a
joint statement.

North Korea committed to abandoning all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear
programs and returning to the NPTand to IAEAsafeguards.

Moreover, two years after that, in February 2007, an agreement was concluded
regarding what each of the Six Parties should do towards implementing the joint
statement.

A group of IAEA inspectors that had entered North Korea verified the shutdown of
the nuclear-related facilities in Yongbyon, and in return. North Korea received
heavy fuel oil.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

The series of events made people think that tenaciously continuing dialogue had

this time finally caused North Korea to change its actions.
But what actually happened?

In February 2005, while the Six-Party Talks were underway, North Korea declared
unilaterally that it was already in possession of nuclear weapons. Moreover, in
October 2006, it openly carried out its first nuclear test.
Its second nuclear test was in 2009. Ultimately that same year. North Korea

announced its withdrawal from the Six-Party Talks, stating it will "never again take
part in such talks."
Furthermore, around this time it was firing ballistic missiles on a repeated basis.

5Mr. President, distinguished colleagues,

Over the course of more than a decade beginning in 1994, the international
community continued its efforts towards dialogue with North Korea with great
perseverance, first through the Agreed Framework, and later through the
Six-Party Talks.
However, what we had to learn is that during the time this dialogue continued.

North Korea had no intention whatsoever of abandoning its nuclear or missile
development.

For North Korea, dialogue was instead the best means of deceiving us and buying
time.

More than anything else, the following fact demonstrates that.
In 1994, North Korea had no nuclear weapons and even its ballistic missile

technology was far from mature.Yet it is now working to attain hydrogen bombs
andlCBMs.

Again and again, attempts to resolve issues through dialogue have all come to
naught.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

In what hope of success are we now repeating the very same failure a third time?

We must make North Korea abandon all nuclear and ballistic missile programs in
a complete, verifiable, and irreversible manner.

What is needed to do that is not dialogue, but pressure.

6.
Mr. President, distinguished colleagues.

On November 15,already 40 years will have passed since a 13-year-old girl
named MegumiYokota was abducted by North Korea.

Megumi and many other Japanese remain abducted in North Korea even to this
day.

I will continue to do all possible efforts so they can set foot on Japan's soil as soon
as possible, until the day when they will finally be in the arms of their parents, and
their family members.

Japan will face up to North Koreab nuclear and missile threat through the
Japan-U.S.Alliance and through Japan, the U.S. and the ROK acting in unity.
We consistently support the stance of the United States: that "all options are on the
table."

Also, I appreciate the unanimous adoption by the Security Coimcil of UNSC
Resolution 2375 on September 11,which imposes strict sanctions against North
Korea.

That clarified our intention to further intensify pressure on North Korea in order to
force it to undertake a fundamental change in its path forward.
But I must make an appeal to you.

North Korea has already demonstrated its disregard of the resolution by
launching yet another missile.

The resolution is nothing more than the beginning.

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

We must prevent the goods, funds, people, and technology necessary for nuclear

and missile development from heading to North Korea.
We must make North Korea comply fully with the repeated resolutions.
We must ensure the strict and full implementation of the series of Security
Council resolutions by all UN member nations.
What is necessary is action.
Whether or not we can put an end to the provocations by North Korea is

dependent upon the solidarity of the international community.
There is not much time left.

7Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen.

North Korea is in a truly fortunate location, adjoining the grcfwth region ofAsia
and the Pacific. It has an industrious labor force as well as undergroimd
resources.

If it were to make use of those, there could be a path towards North Korea

dramatically growing its economy and improving public welfare.
That is where North Korea's bright future lies.

By failing to resolve the abduction, nuclear weapons and missiles issues, and by
becoming a threat to all humanity, there is absolutely no future that North Korea
can open up for itself.
In order to change North Korea's policies, we must strengthen our unity.
Thank you very much.
END

