REPUBLIC OF MALAWI

STATEMENT
BY
HIS EXCELLENCY PROF. ARTHUR PETER MUTHARIKAÿ
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI
AT THE
GENBRAL DEBATE OF THE 72ÿD SESSION OF THE UNITED
NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

MALAWFS COMMITMENT IN
"FOCUSING ON PEOPLE: STRIVING FOR PEACE AND A DECENT

LIFE FOR ALL ON A SUSTAINABLE PLANET"

NEW YORK
20 SEPTEMBER 2017

Your Excellency, Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, President of the General Assembly;
o

Your Excellency, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations;

®

Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government;

•

Distinguished Delegates;

o

Ladies and Gentlemen

The cause that rallies us together is that we are one humanity, on one planet. This is

the tie that binds us all. And all our differences and national interests are secondary to this
overriding cause.

The United Nations was founded to safeguard the human race, its human rights, and
its potential. We are here to protect people, their existence and their rights. We are here to
ensure that the potential of every people, everywhere, fully blossoms into flowers of hope. It
is our sacred duty, as a generation, to take actions that offer hope to next generations.

It is therefore befitting, that this year, we meet to think about focusing on people. For

Africa, we should be focusing on investing in the people if the full potential of African people
is to be realised.

Unfortunately, there are many outside the African continent who choose to focus on
its socio-political weaknesses instead of focusing on the huge potential of African people° As
one analyst has said:

Africa is often seen as a vast continent of incomprehensible tribalism,
endemic corruption, and almost intrinsic misery and violence°

This is the view history has painted in the mind of the world. And this one-sided
perception of Africa must end. This negative view blinds the world from seeing the potential
of African people. We can only realise the potential of any people when we see them
positively.

Mr President,

The eradication of poverty and the pursuit of prosperity across the world should be
based on raising the potential of the people we seek to support. Development cannot be
taken to any people and succeed unless it is driven from within. No human community can
take off socio-economically without empowering its people to drive their own development
agenda. That is why I underline the importance of investing in the human capital.

However, it is also a foregone conclusion that any efforts to invest in the people and
raise their potential need our collaboration as a global family. Hence, our appeal for
concerted action by all member states of the UN and indeed many other global non-state
actors.

Mr. President,

The adoption of Agenda 2030 by the UN reflects our global resolve to address the most
pressing challenges in the spirit of sustainable human collaboration. Our unity among
nations is imperative because we achieve more when we unite and collaborate.

The well-being of the global society is more assured when we work in partnerships for
development. At the same time, we achieve more within our nations with inclusion of all
sectors of society.

Statistics provided by the World Bank and the UN show that there is correlation
between inclusion and empowerment of women on one hand and economic growth and
development on the other.

Mr President,

The inclusion and empowerment of women begin with a focus on the girl child. We
need to do away with early marriages. Indeed, I am pleased to note a global drop of
marriages from 36% to 26% over a period of two years since 2015.

Malawi is proud to be part of this achievement. Among other initiatives, my
Government has passed a law against marriage below the age of 18. By law, Malawi

3

provides an opportunity for girls to grow, mature and make informed choices about their
education and future life. Girls are protected by law in this regard.

I am, therefore, proud to reiterate my Government's commitment in promoting gender
equality, women and girls' empowerment in order to reduce the vulnerabilities of women
and adolescent girls to violence and all forms of abuse.
Mr. President

In focusing on people, one more critical category is the Youth. Youth empowerment is
a means to achieving inclusion. According to the 2015 African Economic Outlook, Africa has

the fastest growing and most youthful population in the world. In giving the Youth the focus
they deserve, the African Union agreed to make 2017 the Year of the Youth. This is the year
we focus on investing in the Youth.
Malawi is honoured to be part of the mission for Youth empowerment. We have taken
decisive measures that include providing technical and entrepreneurial education to the

youth who have not had the opportunity to attend university. At the same time, we are also
increasing access to tertiary education.

One more category that needs inclusion is that of persons with disability. Malawi is
reviewing its policies and strategies in education, health and trade in order to foster effective

inclusion of persons with disabilities.

Further, Malawi has made strides in efforts to eradicate vicious and irrational attacks
against persons with Albinism. There was a time when these attacks became rampant in
some parts of the country. I am glad to report that there have not been any new attacks in
the past six months.

Mr. President,

Malawi is committed to inclusive development. We however recognise that the

majority of our citizens continue to depend on agriculture for their livelihood. But
agriculture is a challenging sector given the current climate variability affecting many parts
of the world. That being the case, Malawi is implementing social protection programmes in
order to cushion the vulnerable segments of our population. Our measures include cash

4

transfer programmes, food for work, school feeding programmes and a farm income subsidy
programme.

Let me take this opportunity to express our gratitude to cooperating partners,
including the various UN bodies for their continued technical and other related support
towards the success of these programmes.

Mr. President,

As we think of focusing on people, it is important to pay close attention at the issues
that affect most vulnerable citizens. Climate change is one factor on top of the list. For an
economy that depends on agriculture in a country like Malawi where 85% of the people are
in agrarian communities, crop failure is always a tragedy. For two consecutive years, Malawi
has suffered alternating heavy rains, floods and drought that led to crop failure and hunger.

The suffering caused by climate change everywhere is real. The people who suffer in
the tragedies are not just in figures and statistics. These are real human souls like anyone
here.

We all need to feel the urgent need to collectively undertake sustainable management
of our natural resources. We must remember that if this planet perishes, we all perish with

it! This is a matter that demands our collective responsibility.

Therefore, let me appeal to all member states to consider strategies and avenues of
collaboration for us to adapt to the fast-changing climate.

Apart from climate change, our world is also collectively facing the threat of terrorism.

Terrorism and conflict hinder progress and make the world live in a state of fear. Anything
that causes mankind to live in a state of fear is an evil to be fought. Malawi stands in
solidarity with the victims of terrorism across the world. We reaffirm our commitment to
stand against all forms of terrorism.

We stand in solidarity with victims of human trafficking and forced migration
wherever they are.

Mr. President

Let me now move to the question of peace. Peace is a prerequisite for development. As
a country, we believe in peace as a necessary condition for human existence. For this
reason, Malawi has been active in peace building operations of the United Nations and
African Union.

Today, Malawi reaffirms its pledge to continue as an envoy of peace. We believe this is
our duty to humanity. We believe that in protecting your neighbours, you protect yourself.

While we all seek peace as a necessary condition for existence, we face the threat of
nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons are an existential threat to humanity. The threat of
nuclear weapons is a concern to us all. Ironically, even those nations who keep nuclear
weapons get concerned with this threat. The idea of keeping nuclear weapons questions the
wisdom of mankind.

Let me express, categorically, my Government's disapproval of the spread of ballistic

missile technology. This should not be tolerated in any way by any member states of the
United Nations.

There is no country that is too small to contribute to the peace agenda of the world.

There is no continent that is too poor to be part of the global peace agenda.

Malawi strongly supports the African position for the full representation of the
continent on the Security Council. The United Nations can no longer claim to lead in
democracy while side-lining a representation of 1.2 billion people from Africa. How can we

claim to be in unity with those whom we exclude? Africa must be included!

Our rising Africa is always ready to play her role in the global community. And Malawi
will continue to be a global player.

Thank you for your attention!

m

6

