STATEMENT

DELIVERED BY

HIS EXCELLENCY MUHAMMADU BUHARI,
PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

AT

THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 72No SESSION OF
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN NEW YORK,

ON

TUESDAY, 19 SEPTEMBER 2017

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe oF fhe 72na Session oF
Unifed Nafions General Assembly, 19th Sepfember 2017.

>Mr. President,

Fellow Heads of State and Government,
>Mr. Secretary-General,

>Distinguished Delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate of the 72ÿd Session
of United Nations General Assembly, 19ÿh September 2017.

On

behalf
my of
country, Nigeria, !

congratulate you Mr. President on your
election and Mr. Gutteres on his first General
Assembly outing as our Secretary-General. !

assure you both of my country's solidarity and
cooperation.

You will indeed need the

cooperation of all member States as we are
meeting during extra-ordinarily troubled and
dangerous times. Let me also thank former
Secretary-General Mr. Ban ki Moon for his

service to the United Nations and wish him
peaceful retirement.
Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate of the 72ÿa Session
of United Nations General /ÿssembly, l[gth September 2017.

Mr, President,

=

The previous year has witnessed many

far-reaching developments. Some of the most

significant events include the Iran Nuclear
Deal, the Paris Climate Change Agreement
and, of grave concern, the North Korean
nuclear crisis.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe of fhe 726 Session
of Unifed Nations General Assembly, 19fh Sepfember 2017.

4

Mr, President,
3.

i must also commend the UN's role in

helping to settle thousands of innocent
civilians caught in the conflicts in Syria, iraq
and Afghanistan. In particular, we must

collectively thank the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany under the
commendable

leadership of

Chancellor

Angela Merkel and the Governments of Italy,
Greece and Turkey fo'r assisting hundreds of
thousands of refugees.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe oF fhe 72na Session
of Unifed Nafions General Assembly, 19th Sepfember 2017.

4. In an exemplary show of solidarity, the
international community came together within
my own region to assist the countries and

communities in the Sahel and the Lake Chad
regions to contain the threats posed by AI
Qaida and Boko Haram.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate oF the 72rÿ Session
of United Nations General Assembly, 19th September 2017.

6

5.

We thank the Security Council for

visiting the countries of the Lake Chad Basin
to assess the security situation and
humanitarian

needs, and for

pledging

assistance to rebuild lives and livelihoods.
Indeed, in Nigeria we are providing relief and
humanitarian assistance to millions in 1ÿÿ

camps and those afflicted by terrorism,
drought, floods and other natural disasters.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe oF fhe 72na Session
of Unifed Nafions General Assembly, ]c)fh Sepfember 2017.

6.

In the last year, the

international

community came together to focus on the
need

for

gender

equality,

youth

empowerment, social inclusion, and the

promotion of

education,

creativity

and

innovation. The frontiers of good governance,

democracy including holding free and fair
elections, and enthronement of the rule of law
are

expanding everywhere, especially in

Africa.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate oF the 72na Session
oF United Nations General Assembly, 19th September 2017.

m

Our faith in democracy remains firm and

unshaken.

Our

ECOWAS

came

regional

organisation

together to

uphold

democratic principles in The Gambia- as we
had done previously in Cote D'lvoire.

Stafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe of fhe 72na Session
of Unifed Nations General Assembly, 19fh Sepfember 2017.

8. Through our individual national efforts,

state institutions are being strengthened to
promote

accountability,

and to combat

corruption and asset recovery. These can

only be achieved through the international
community cooperating and providing critical
assistance and material support.

We shall

also cooperate in addressing the growing
transnational crimes such as forced labour,
modern day slavery, human trafficking and
cybercrime.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate oF the 72"d Session I0
of United Nations General Assembly, !9fh September 2017.

Mr. President,

9. These cooperative efforts should be
sustained. We must collectively devise
strategies

and mobilise the required

responses to stop fleeing ISIS fighters from
mutating and infiltrating into the Sahel and the
Lake Chad Basin, where there are insufficient
resources and response capacity is weak.

Stafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debafe of fhe 72nÿ Session 11
of Unii-ed Naiions General Assembly, 19*h Sepiember 2017.

10.

This will require strong UN cooperation

with regional organisations, such as the
African Union, in conflict prevention and
management. The UN should continue to take

primary leadership of the maintenance of
international peace and Security by providing,
in a predictable and sustainable manner,
adequate funding and other enablers to

regional initiatives and

peacekeeping

operations authorized by the Security Council.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate of the 72na Session 12
of United Nations General Assembly, 19th September 2017.

Mr. President,

11. New conflicts should not make us lose
focus on ongoing unresolved old conflicts. For
example,

several UN Security Council

Resolutions from 1967 on the Middle East
crisis remain unimplemented. Meanwhile, the

suffering of the Palestinian people and the
blockade of Gaza continue.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari at fhe General Debafe oF fhe 72nÿ Session 13
of Unifed Nations General Assembly, !9th Sepfember- 2017.

12. Additionally, we are now confronted by
the desperate human rights and humanitarian

situations in Yemen and most tragically in the
Rakhine State of Myanmar. The Myanmar
crisis is very reminiscent of what happened in

Bosnia in 1995 and in Rwanda in 1994.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate oF the 72na Session 14
of United Nations General Assembly, 19fh September 2017.

13. The international community cannot
remain silent and not condemn the
horrendous suffering caused by what, from a[I
indications is a state-backed programme of

brutal depopulation of the Rohingya inhabited
areas in Myanmar on the bases of ethnicity
and religion. We fully endorsethe call by the
Secretary-General on the Government of

Myanmar to order a halt to the ongoing ethnic
cleansing and ensure the safe return of the

displaced Rohingya to their homes in safety
and dignity.
Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debate oF fhe 72na Session 15
oF Unifed Nations General Assembly, 19fh Sepfember 2017.

14. In all these crises, the primary victims
are the people, the most vulnerable being
women and children. That is why the theme of
this session Focusing on People: Striving
for Peace and Decent Life for All on a
Sustainable Planet' is most apposite.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate of the 72ÿ Session 16
of United Nations General Assembly, 19ÿh September 201"7.

15. While the

international

community

grapples to resolve these conflicts, we must
be mindful, and focus on the widening

inequalities within societies, and the gap
between the rich and the poor nations. These

inequalities

and gaps are part of the

underlining root causes of competition for
resources, frustration and anger leading to

spiralling instability.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe of fhe 72ÿ Session 17
of Unifed Nations General Assembly, 19th Sepfember 2017.

16.

The most pressing threat to international

peace and security today is the accelerated
nuclear weapons development programme by
North Korea. Since the Cuban missile crisis of
1962, we have never come so close to the
threat of nuclear war as we have now.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate oF the 72rÿ Session 18
of United Nations General Assembly, 19th September 2017.

17. All necessary pressure and diplomatic
efforts must be brought to bear on North
Korea to accept peaceful resolution of the
crisis. As Hiroshima and Nagasaki painfully
remind us, if we fail, the catastrophic and
devastating human loss and environmental
degradation cannot be imagined.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari af fhe General Debafe oF fhe 72."ÿ Session 19
of Unifed Nafions General Assembly, 19*h Sepfember 2017.

Mr, President,

18. Nigeria proposes a strong

UN

delegation to urgently engage the North
Korean Leader. The delegation, led by the

Security Council, should include members
from all the regions.

Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate oF the 72nd Session 20
of United Nations General Assembly, 19th September 2017.

r

19. The crisis in the Korean peninsuJa
underscores the urgency for all member

states, guided, by the spirit of enthroning a
safer and more peaceful world, to ratify

without delay the Treaty prohibiting nuclear
weapons, which will be open for signature
here tomorrow.

Sfafemenf by Presidenf Muhammadu Buhari of fhe General Debafe oF fhe 72"d Session 21
of Unifed Nations General ÿ,ssembly, lc)fh Sepfember 2017.

Mr. President,
20.

I end my remarks by reiterating Nigeria's

abiding commitment to the foundational
principles and goals of the United Nations.
Since our admission as a member state in

1960, we have always participated in all
efforts to bring about global peace, security
and development. Nigeria will continue to

support the UN in all its efforts, including the
attainment of the

2030 Agenda for

Sustainable Development.
I thank you.
Statement by President Muhammadu Buhari at the General Debate of the 72na Session
of United Nations General Assembly, 19ÿh September 2017.

22

