Statement

by
Hon. Tuilaepa Sailele Halielegaoi
Prime Hinister of the Independent State of Samoa
at the
General Debate, 72nd session of the UN General Assembly
22 September 2017, UN HQ, New York.

Mr President,

Fellow delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen
Samoa warmly welcomes your assumption of the Presidency of the
72nd session of our General Assembly, at a time when our organization

is going through unprecedented volatile and difficult times. We look
forward to your leadership so that together we can chart a more safe,

predictable and humane pathway in our journey through life's
uncharted waters. You can count on Samoa's support as we work in

partnership to translate into tangible and measurable achievements
the overarching theme of your tenure "Focusing on People -

Striving for Peace and a Decent Life for All on a Sustainable
Planet."

Your predecessor, Ambassador Peter Thomson of Fiji demonstrated

strong leadership during his successful presidency and we wish him
well in his new calling,
Page 1 of 10

Mr. President,
Secretary-General Guterres is passionate and committed to turn the

United Nations into an efficient and effective organization that is fit for
purpose and readily responsive to the needs of the very people it was
established to serve in the first place. In working to make the UN's
focus more people-centered than about processes, Samoa assures the
Secretary-General of its full support.

Mr President
This week's annual general debate is the twentieth successive general

debate of the General Assembly I have attended and addressed. My
continuous participation is a measure of my conviction and my

Government's unqualified faith in the value of the United Nations and
the endless potential it holds to deal successfully with any issue of
diversity and gravity that it is confronted with. The United Nations
remains our choice of last resort and hope to provide the political will
and the necessary commitment to address our challenges - hence why
we want it to remain relevant, adaptable to changing circumstances

and respond effectively to the current and emerging challenges facing
our world.

Mr. President,

We meet this week against the backdrop of a world plagued with
uncertainty and a sense of ebbing hope. We are losing the fight to free
our world from poverty, instability and conflict abounds and we are no
longer distanced and disconnected from deadly acts of terrorism and
the devastation of natural and human-induced disasters. We are living
in an environment of risk. Climate change is an existential threat.
Allow me to pause and offer our sincere condolences to the

governments and peoples of all the countries that have suffered from
the recent devastation of hurricanes and earthquakes.

Page 2 of 10

Mr. President,

We cannot help but watch with trepidation and uneasiness the global
dynamics nudging our world perilously close to a potential catastrophe
of unimaginable proportions. As small island Pacific countries, we are
no longer protected by our isolation - we are bystanders but with the

greatest to lose in the unfolding power drama being played out in the
Korean Peninsula. We pray for visionary leadership with sound moral
judgment on both sides to ensure we give 'peace a chance'

It explains why I signed yesterday on Samoa's behalf the "Treaty on
the prohibition of nuclear weapons". As a signatory to this historic
treaty, we wanted to demonstrate unequivocally our aspiration to have
a world without nuclear weapons. The conventional narrative that the
possession of nuclear weapons will act as deterrent to make the world
a safer place to live, is not borne out by the current realities -

otherwise the developments in the Korean peninsula would not have
happened at all. We firmly believe that possessing nuclear weapons
and adding new nuclear powers only make our world less safe, less
secure and less peaceful - hence the need to rid our world completely
of all nuclear weapons.

No matter the noble goal for having such arsenals, availing them to
the wrong and unprincipled hands is a recipe for doom and mayhem,
as people, after all, are human and mere mortals.

But all is not yet lost. The adoption of the New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants which offers a united approach to address the
plight of the world's displaced peoples, the creation of the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Office aimed at enhancing the

Organization's capability to assist Member States in implementing the
UN Global Counter Terrorism Strategy and the historic, first ever
Treaty banning nuclear weapons, are all positive developments moving
fo rwa rd.
Page 3 of 10

Mr President,
Climate change, like other global challenges, cross borders seamlessly.
It has no respect for sovereignty and does not discriminate countries
between rich or poor. Its dire consequences are real including those
who remain in denial.

Climate change is a perpetual priority issue for Samoa and our Pacific
region. In our small islands, as witnessed recently, natural

catastrophes can decimate an entire country bringing with them great
pain and upheaval to peoples' lives as well as set back the national
economy for years. And we know this from repeated past experience.

Our islands limited resources and the lack of adaptive capacity makes
the burden of rehabilitation a mammoth undertaking. While we
applaud the resilience of our people to bounce back from any major
natural disaster, the scars of these natural phenomena take years to
heal and recover from. And if it's any consolation to our island states,
even some of the well-resourced developed countries are still trying to

recover and rehabilitate from the impacts of catastrophes which
devastated their economies.
Mr President,
Samoa remains committed to ongoing efforts to pursue respect for

human rights and rule of law and does its part to contribute to this
global effort.
A first ever United Nations human rights council expert group at
Samoa's nvitationl visited last month to carry out a fact-finding
mission to assess the progress made towards eliminating

discrimination against women and the protection and promotion of
women's rights in the country. Samoa is the first Pacific country to
open its doors to this independent mechanism.
Page 4 of 10

Mr President,

We continue to place great faith in the rule of law and the vital
protection it offers to all States, especially to weak and small countries
like mine with no armed force and not affiliated to any military
grouping. The International Criminal Court is an important part of the
architecture of world peace based on the rule of law and we call for the
early activation of the Kampala Amendments. The ICC was
represented at the recent Pacific Islands Forum Leaders meeting
earlier this month in Samoa.

Mr President
Terrorism is an offence to humanity and against the core values of the
United Nations. For Samoa, I reaffirm our strong support for the

relevant Security Council resolutions against terrorism which provide a
clear signal of our determination to suppress terrorist activities,
including training, international movement and financing. Samoa

continues to align its domestic policies and legislation to meet its
international obligations to help fight terrorism as well as participate
actively in the Pacific regional security initiatives.
In the context of peacekeeping, Samoa's unwavering support for the
United Nations Peacekeeping work is underscored by seventeen years

of uninterrupted police deployment to serve in missions in Liberia,
Sudan, Timor-Leste and South Sudan, Darfur. Small as we are,

Samoan police continue to serve side by side with officers from other
countries in places that require the intervention of the United Nations.
Our commitment is rooted in our firm belief in the role United Nations
peacekeeping plays in helping to eliminate the causes of conflict and in
bringing about peace and stability. We fully endorse and condemn
sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping and this is why we
signed the international compact initiative of the Secretary-General to
Page 5 of 10

committing countries

to eliminating these heinous acts in

peacekeeping.
Mr President,

The 2030 Agenda is our framework to put the world onto a path
towards a sustainable and resilient future, for people, planet and

prosperity. While the 2030 agenda remains high priority on the global
agenda, and we see signs of momentum in terms of implementation,

much work still needs to be done. The need to accelerate global action
and awareness on the SDGs still remains. The adoption of the Pacific
regional roadmap for SDGS complements Samoa's roadmap based on

an integrated approach for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda,
Samoa Pathway, Paris Agreement and Pacific Framework for

Regionalism which are aligned to our national development strategy.
For Small Island Developing States, the SAMOA Pathway is their
sustainable development roadmap which highlights their key tasks and
priorities and links closely with the 2030 agenda. As we approach the
5 year review of the SAMOA Pathway in 2019, it is important to ensure
that the comprehensive review of the UN support to SIDS is properly
addressed and implemented. We need to study closely lessons learnt
from the Partnerships registered for SIDS and encourage proactive
follow up as well as pursue new partnerships for the group's
sustainable development.

Several partnerships and Voluntary commitments specific to SIDS
were launched during the Ocean Conference since the last annual SIDS
Partnership dialogue. Prior to the mid-term review of the SIDS
outcome document it is important to look at ways to improve

implementation and addressing the gaps and emerging issues.

Page 6 of 10

The success of the Ocean Conference was crucial to building

momentum of SDG implementation given that the Ocean is the
lifeblood of the planet. Addressing the targets of SDG14 for SIDS is
catalytic to implementing several, if not all of the17 Goals.
With the new Blue Pacific concept for the Pacific region, and the
concrete outcomes from the Conference, emphasis is to be placed on
implementation. Samoa at the Ocean's Conference pledged 13

Voluntary Commitments that showcased national efforts towards the
conservation management and sustainable use of the Ocean and its
resources and engagement of communities.

During the Ocean Conference in June, I was appointed the Special
Ambassador of the International Year of Sustainable Tourism for
Development by UN World Tourism Organization. 2017 is a crucial year
for sustainable tourism and given the reliance of many of our small
economies on tourism, and the role it can play in SDG implementation;
we will continue to promote the role of Tourism in support of peaceful
societies and sustainable development
Mr President,
Let me now turn to the regional context and share with you some of

the decisions taken by the Leaders of our Pacific Islands Forum at their
Summit which my country was privileged to host at the beginning of
this month. We chose as the theme for our year-long chairmanship

"The Blue Pacific: Our sea of islands: Our security through
sustainable development, management and conservation".
In Samoa, we re-aÿrmed the Framework for Pacific Regionalism
to drive our region's policy agenda towards the realization of our vision
for a region of peace, harmony, security, social inclusion, and

Page 7 of 10

prosperity so that all Pacific people can lead free, healthy and
productive lives,

We also endorsed The Blue Pacific identity as the core driver of
collective action for advancing the Leaders vision under the Framework

for Pacific Regionalism. This new narrative calls for inspired leadership
and a long-term Pacific Islands Forum foreign policy commitment to
act as one for the good of all, rather than a few. The Blue Pacific
identity reinforces the potential of our shared stewardship of the
Pacific Ocean, based on the explicit recognition of our shared ocean
identity, ocean geography, and ocean resources. It aims to strengthen

collective action by putting The Blue Pacific at the centre of regional
policy making and united action for advancing the Forum Leaders'
Vision for the Region.

With other Pacific Leaders, we discussed the key priorities for our
region; a few of which I will highlight as their implementation
requires collective and urgent action from this august gathering of the
United Nations.
Mr President,

Firstly, climate change remains a priority challenge for the Pacific
region because of its existential nature and its security implications.

Climate change is already happening; it cannot be washed away by the
rising tides. It has significant security implications and its impact
threatens the continued existence and viability as sovereign states of
some of our low lying atolls. Even those countries, which have been in
self-denial to date of the climate change phenomenon must surely now

accept the weight of scientific evidence.
The implementation of the Paris Agreement is of high priority requiring
collective action to address this existential threat. We are confident

that Fiji's presidency of the November COP23 will focus the spotlight
Page 8 of 10

challenges and the need for genuine partnerships to help us deliver on
our "nationally determined contributions" as part of the

implementation of the Paris Agreement. The Pacific has also endorsed
its Framework for Resilience Development as well as its institutional
arrangements to support the elaboration and implementation of the
Paris agreement
Secondly, the ocean and its resources continue to be critical to the

livelihoods of our people and region. The impacts of Climate Change,
Illegal Unregulated Unreported fishing and overfishing are threatening
the sustainability of this crucial resource of our region. The Pacific
Forum members will continue to be actively engaged on all Ocean
related issues of the 72nd session of the GA including the Biodiversity
Beyond National Jurisdiction process
Thirdly, we adopted the "Pacific Roadmap for Sustainable
Development" and its implementation strategy. This demonstrates

the seriousness our region places on implementing the 17 SDGs and
the importance of a regional approach to meeting these international
commitments. We continue to count on the important role of the UN

and our partners to support regional and national efforts for SDG
implementation particularly the building of our capabilities. We look
forward to the Secretary General's reform and how the Forum can

engage to ensure its priorities in terms of its SDG roadmap and the
implementation of the SAMOA Pathway, Paris Agreement and other
regional needs are considered in the reform.

And finally in the context of security, the Pacific Islands Forum remains
committed to collective arrangements and mechanisms to assist
regional governments recover from national conflicts and crises. The

success of these arrangements together with the support of the UN,
are already evident in the positive results of the Regional Assistance
Page 9 of 10

Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI). I am honoured to acknowledge
the successful conclusion of the Regional Assistance Mission in the
Solomon Islands (RAMSI) which brought together peacekeepers from
all members countries of the Pacific Islands Forum.

Leaders acknowledged the successful conclusion of RAMSI and
recognized it as a success story of regionalism and a workable

example of regional cooperation and diplomacy, embodying more than
a decade of partnership and cooperation amongst Forum members.

Leaders agreed to build on the Biketawa Declaration and other Forum
security related declarations to expand the concept of security,
inclusive of human security, humanitarian assistance, prioritising
environmental security, and regional cooperation in building resilience
to disasters and climate change.

The Pacific over the years continues to call for advancing the cause of
nuclear non-proliferation. Issues such as radioactive contaminants in

the Republic of the Marshall Islands are of great concern to RMI and
the region. We count on the promised support of the relevant UN
entities to respond accordingly to requests for assistance including
working closely with the regional technical agencies. The US is also
encouraged to take urgent action to address the issue.
Thank you.

Page 10 of 10

