Republic of South Sudan
Office of the First Vice President

STATEMENT

By
H.Eo GEN. TABAN DENG GAI

THE FIRST VICE PRESIDENT
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN

AT THE 72nd SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, NEW YORK, USA.

23rd SEPTEMBER 2017
New York USA

Your Excellency Miroslav Laÿ.j&k, President of the 72nd
Session of the United Nations General Assembly,

Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,

Honourable Ministers,

Distinguished Delegates,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Good Morning.

Mr. President,

1. I am honoured to give this statement on behalf of H.E.
President Salva Kiir Mayardit, the President of the
Republic of South Sudan who unfortunately could not
be present here today due to pressing domestic
commitments back home.

2. I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your

election as President of this 72nd Session of the
General Assembly. South Sudan affirms it
commitment to play its role in supporting you as you
lead this historic session.
3. ! would like also to take this opportunity to congratulate
Hon. Antonio Guterres and his deputy Hon. Amina
Mohammed for winning the confidence of this August
House, South Sudan stands ready to cooperate and
work closely with you.

Mr. President,

4. The theme that you have selected for this Session
"Focusing on People: striving for peace and a decent
life for aft on a sustainable planet", resonates very

well with the aspirations of our nation for peace,
unity, development and prosperity.

5. Your selected theme is in inline with the declaration
of this year 2017, by H.E. President Salva Kiir
Mayardit, as the "Year of Peace and Prosperity."

This solemn declaration is intended to cement our
resolve that the aspirations our people have fought
long and hard for are realised. However, Realization

of peace is greatly impeded with insufficient

resources. We commend the efforts of the IGAD,

African Union and international partners to shun and
isolate political actors that seek power through
violence. We urge all stakeholders to continue
embracing this common position and renew our
commitments to further build on the progress that we
have made to ensure that our people inherit a future
that we always envisioned and aspired to.

6. Nonetheless, we do not wish to delude ourselves that

peace, unity and development can be achieved
overnight, but require relentless and concerted efforts,

dedication and commitment by all partners, which we
are pursuing willingly, consciously and vigorously.

7. We strongly befieve that 'peace is not a one day
affair or event.' For us and our friendly partners in

peace, there is simply no other viable alternative
than making peace. Nonetheless, realisation of
peace takes time. Attaining peace in South Sudan
is a process, it requires our collective efforts. It is

a consistent and persistent build up of positive
steps towards achieving a world that we envision
for the future generations in our country, in our

continent and the world at large.

4

8. it is, therefore, against this background that the

Transitional Government of National Unity (TGONU)
has embraced the full implementation of the
Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in the

Republic of South Sudan (ARCSS) as the only
instrument pivotal to achieving this mission and vision.

By way of updating this August House, allow me Mr.
President, to highlight some of the important steps that our
government has taken to further enhance the achievement
of peace in our young country.

9. The TGONU continues to stand by its
commitment to implement the unilateral ceasefire,
which was announced by H.E. President Salva Kiir

Mayardit in May 2017 with calls to estranged
opposition groups to reciprocate this extension of an
olive branch still ongoing.

10.

With support from friendly partners, the

government has embarked on implementing key
aspects of the Transitional Security Arrangements
such as the Security Sector Reform, Cantonment of

forces and training of Joint Integrated Police (JIP) in
an effort to demilitarise our communities. We hope that
the recently graduated JIP for Juba will be an
example, that can be emulated in other security sector
institutions especially through the overhaul and
restructuring of the SPLA into a professional National
Army.

Mr. President,

11.

The TGONU is spearheading grassroots inter-

communal peace initiatives as ongoing communal
conflicts characterised by cattle rustling, child
abduction, high bride dowry and land disputes can be
serious stumbling blocks to peace. It is absolutely
important to find ways to transform the way our
communities interact with each other and the
international community should encourage and
support government efforts and invest in efforts aimed
at addressing these local conflicts, so that success
stories can be replicated all over South Sudan at the
different faces of dialogue. It is in this area that ! would

like to highlight the role of young South Sudanese as
either agents or detractors of peace. If I may use an
example of how an inter communal feud,

charactedsed by cattle rustling and child abduction
escaJated almost into an uncontrolled conflict simply
because the youth from the different communities
were incited to violence, makes us appreciate our

collective effort in ensuring the situation in South
Sudan can only be salvaged through no other means
than embracing peace.

I wish also to highlight the important role that South
Sudanese women continue to play as peace
builders and custodians of these inter-communal
peace initiatives.

It is against this background that the TGONU, with the
support of religious leaders, UNMISS, UNDP and
other partners, is engaging in grassroots "people to
people" peace by way of investing in improving the
economic activities between communities like building
markets, rehabilitating schools, constructing fishing
storage facilities and peaceful disarmament of armed
communities have improved relations between
warring communities, host communities and IDPs.

12.

Currently in South Sudan, we are optimistic

of the return of peace. Lately, we have witnessed

refugees and Internally Displaced Persons(IDP's)
gradually voluntarily returning to their villages and
several steps within communities indicating the
direction of co-existing and living in harmony.

There will be challenges and reversals, but the big
picture should be the direction of movement. We are
very much open to listening to counsel and joint action
but we also expect our partners to acknowledge and
reciprocate progress, demonstrate some sense of

respect and trust. An overtly confrontational approach
risks creating a siege and bunker mentality. However,

we are confident that soon violence and wars shall be
stories of the past.

13.

The National Dialogue Initiative (NDI), which

was declared by H.E. President Saiva Kiir Mayardit, is
making strong and steady progress with regards to
government's commitment to address a number of

political and security issues with the view of creating
an enabling environment for dialogue. Amongst
others, major steps taken include: (1) release of
prisoners including journalists, (2) expansion of the
Steering Committee to include all the relevant
stakeholders in the country, (3) ongoing reach-out to

opposition figures, and (4) declaration of unilateral
cessation of hostilities.

14. The National Dialogue initiative, a process whose
primary objective is promoting reconciliation and
enhancing confidence in the peace process so as to
not only make dialogue the only viable option to
resolving conflict but also as a foundation to the
National Constitutional Review process.

At this juncture, I would like to note that the steering
committee of the National Dialogue has began to
embark on engagement with all shades of political
opinion,in particular those living outside South Sudan,
in order to ensure that: (i) inclusivity in the national
dialogue is achieved. (ii) the outcomes of the National
Dialogue are reflective of all the components of South
Sudanese Community. The Steering Committee is
also engaging teams of resource persons who will go
to all the states, counties, Payams and Bomas

(localities) to organize meetings with representatives
of the relevant groups to seek their views on the
grievances held by their people, and to ensure that
these are effectively addressed and corrected. The
results of these discussions in the states shall be

reported to the Steering Committee, which will in turn
present these to the larger National Dialogue
Conference.

The

process

will

end

with

recommendations and resolutions that shall be
presented to the national leadership under the
presidency and to the national parliament for final
adoption and implementation.

is. Our government is supportive of the efforts aimed
at revitalizing the implementation of the peace
agreement- We recently convened, in our capital

Juba, a meeting of IGAD Council of Ministers to
deliberate on ways to further expedite the preparation
for the establishment of the High Level Revitalization
Forum, which is envisaged to focus on practical ways
to expedite the implementation of the peace
agreement.

16.

Today South Sudan enjoys cordial relations

with its neighbours. These countries, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Sudan and Uganda are: (1) hosting South
Sudanese refugees,

(2) providing corridors for

humanitarian access and (3) supporting development
projects, which further enhance the efforts of the
TGONU to bring peace. We are dependent on these

3_0

good relations in order to revive and increase oil
production; construct and maintain important road
infrastructure; and provide electricity in the border
towns, which are key ingredients for boosting the
economy and work as incentives for peace.

17.

On Abyei, our government reaffirms its

willingness and readiness to implement the
African Union High Level Implementation Panel

(AUHIP) Proposal of September 21st, 2012, which
was accepted by H.E. President Salva Kiir
Mayardit as presented by the Panel= We are hopeful

that the Republic of Sudan and the Republic of South
Sudan will soon resume cooperation in implementing
this proposal.

Mr. President,

18.

! would like to report to this August House

that our government is cooperating with the

United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
and facilitates the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force (RPF). In the past few months we
have witnessed the arrival of members of the
advanced RPF as agreed with the United Nations. The
government reaffirms its commitment to work closely

11

with the United Nations, AU and IGAD in seeing the
smooth implementation and operationalization of the
mandate of these troops in South Sudan.

19.

The TGONU continues to work towards

ensuring that humanitarian access to those in
need is unhindered. This has been done through
continuous and open dialogue with aid agencies and
striving to have more humanitarian corridors opened
up. With your permission Excellency, I wish to
commend the concerted efforts of the various
humanitarian agencies that positively responded and
worked to reverse the famine situation in parts of
South Sudan, and some gains not withstanding, I
would like to urge that continued support is necessary
in achieving a hunger free South Sudan. I would like
to take this opportunity to express our condolences
and prayers to the families of those humanitarian aid
workers who lost their lives in the line of duty in South
Sudan.

20.

While we appreciate that saving lives is

important, we ought also save livelihoods. We
cannot continue to clean the floor while the tap is
open. The old paradigm that humanitarian intervention

12

first and development later is not a viable policy in the
case of South Sudan. It is important to incentivise
peace and stability through a balanced approach
to development and embracing a new way of
working. Stabilisation and Recovery initiatives are
essential, and emergency support needs to be

effectively complemented with some level of economic
dynamism that provides new platform for social
cohesion and resilience-building. As partners we all

need to do business different. As government we will
redouble our efforts to ensure access and improve the

enabling environment for humanitarian intervention, it
is our expectation that a smart combination and
calibration of development and humanitarian support
is needed to maintain the positive momentum.

21. Our ultimate goal and responsibility is to give an
opportunity for peace to all South Sudanese which
will enable them to choose their own leaders
through free, fair and credible elections. Our focus
for the remaining months of the transitional period,
therefore, is to ensure that adequate preparation and
creation of conducive environment for these elections

are at the forefront of our priorities, and will see to it

13

peace is realised and that sufficient resources have
been allocated in this regard.

Mr. President,

22.

These efforts are core building blocks and

prerequisites for boosting confidence among and
within our communities, which will stimulate them to
voluntarily and gradually return to their homes. I
would like to reiterate our stand that we are of the
opinion that these efforts can only be sustained 'ifand-only-if all political actors continue to respect and
reciprocate the unilateral ceasefire declared by H.E.
President Salva Kiir earlier this year.

23.

Mr. President, the progress that we speak about

can only be witnessed once we start to see progress
in the reforms of the United Nations Security Council.
It is an urgent task to realize the reforms of the United
Nations Security Council, since the current
composition and function of the Security Council does
not reflect the realities of the international community
in the 21st century.

14

In order to achieve concrete progress on the Security
Council reforms, it is imperative to launch text-based
negotiations in the Intergovernmental Negotiations
(IGN) during the 72nd session of the General
Assembly.

24.

In this regard, South Sudan wishes to add its

voice in expressing its concerns regarding the rising
tensions in the Korean Peninsula. South Sudan
supports the call of the international community
urging North Korea to fully comply with the relevant

United Nations Security Council (UNSC) on nuclear
tests and ballistic missile launches.

25.

South Sudan urges North Korea to show sincere

will

and

concrete

actions

towards

the

denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

26.

In regard to climate change, although South

Sudan green house gas emissions are negligible,
it is one of the worst Countries affected by climate
change. The Country is experiencing recurring
droughts and according to the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change it is the fastest warming
Country in the region in terms of flooding, loss of
15

biodiversity and livelihoods. I am glad to inform this
August House that South Sudan has ratified the Paris
Agreement and has prepared its National Determined
Contributions and National Adaptation Programme of
Action to implement the projects embodied in both
documents.

Mr. President,

27.

Allow me at this juncture to extend my

appreciation to the member states of IGAD, the IGAD
plus, the AU, TRIOKA, China, Japan and the broader
international community for their support to the peace
process and development in my country. While we
appreciate that South Sudan, as a nation, cannot

operate in isolation, the direction of the way forward
must be "South Sudanese-Led' and solutions
"home grown" if we are genuinely striving to achieve
sustainable results.

Long Live South Sudan!
Long Live the United Nations!
i thank you, Mr. President.

16

