^\V\

THE PERMANENT MISSION OFTHE SYRIAN ARAR

3

A.

A..

jk_oVl (^<1—I ^ fliljjl

REPORUC TO THE UNinO NATIONS - HEW YORK

Statement by
H.E. Walid Al-Moualem

Deputy Prime Minister

Minister ofForeign Affairs and Expatriates
Of
The Syrian Arab Republic

Head ofthe delegation ofthe Syrian Arab Republic
At

The General Debate

Ofthe 72"^ Session ofthe United Nations General Assembly
New York

September 23'''', 2017

Please check against delivery

A

President of the seventy-second session of the United Nations General Assembly,

I would liketo congratulate you on yourelection as president of the current session of the
General Assembly and wish you all success. I would also like to thank your predecessor for his

important role at the helm of the General Assembly during the previous session. I congratulate
Mr. Antonio Guterres on his appointment as Secretary-General of the United Nations and wish

him the best in carrying out his responsibilities in service of the principles and purposes of the
UN Charter.

Ladies and gentlemen,

As we meet again, our world is facing mounting challenges and dangers on a daily basis,

and a persistent standoffbetween two sets of forces: forces that seek to control and dominate
nations and their riches, by turning back the clock, re-establishing a unipolar world order, fueling
chaos and war, and violating international and humanitarian laws; and opposite forces that work

tirelessly to create a more balanced, secure, and just world, one that respects the sovereignty of
states and the right of peoplesto exercise self-determination and build their own future.
As we meet again, many people continue to pay dearly and sacrifice their lives, security,
stability and livelihood, as a result of the policies of certain countries. Those countries falsely
believe that they could use terrorism as a tool to satisfy their greed and further their ill-conceived
agendas, which do not serve the interests of any people, not even their own. No people has
suffered at the hands of terrorism more than the Syrian people, who, for six years now, has

fought against terrorists pouring from all over the world, supported by parties from the region
and beyond.

For more than six years, Syrians have endured the worst and have made great sacrifices

to defend their coxmtry in the face of a terrorist war of unprecedented brutality, which has spared
no one and no-thing, targeting irmocent people, services, the infrastructure and cultural heritage.
Despite it all, Syria is determined, more than ever, to eradicate terrorism from every part of the

country, without exception, thanks to the sacrifices of our army and the steadfastness of our
people.
Mr. President,

Since the beginning of the war, our state policy has followed two main tracks: combating
terrorism, and working hard towards a political solution that stems the bloodshed and restores
stability.

On the counter-terrorism front, the Syrian Arab Army along with its supporting forces
and allies are making daily achievements, clearing out territories and uprooting terrorists.

However, the threat of this plague persists, claiming the lives of Syrians on a daily basis, and
depleting the country's resources. We must all xmderstand that terrorism and the underlying
Takfirist extremist ideology will continue to spread like a tumor throughout the world and haunt

all of our people unless every one of us demonstrates a genuine will to cooperate to confront it
together. Any such endeavor must respect the sovereignty of states and the interests of the

people, and must let go of the illusion that terrorism can be used as a tool for political gains and
narrow interests.

On the political front, the Syrian government has spared no effort since the early months

of the crisis to stop the bloodshed. The success of local reconciliations would not have been

possible without the leadership's political support and the numerous amnesty decrees issued by
President Bashar Al-Assad, which allowed everyone who had taken up arms to lay them down
and resume their normal life.

These successful reconciliations have allowed tens of thousands of IDPs and refugees to

go back home and helped improve the living conditions of a great number of Syrians who had
fallen victim to terrorist crimes. Syria is determined to scale up reconciliation efforts, whenever

possible, because it is the best means to alleviate the suffering of Syrians and restore stability and
normalcy.
Ladies and gentlemen,

Since day one, the Syrian government has positively considered all initiatives to put an
end to the war. However, these initiatives eventually failed after states that supported and fuelled

terrorism decided to persist in their aggressive policies against Syria and its people.
As for the Astana and Geneva tracks, the Syrian government has shown seriousness and

commitment and has done its best to provide the necessary conditions for these efforts to succeed
and achieve their goals.

We are encouraged by the Astana process and the resulting 'de-escalation zones' and

hope that it will help us reach an actual cessation of hostilities and separate terrorist groups, such
as ISIL, Al-Nusra and others, from those groups that have agreed to join the Astana process. This
will be the real test of how committed and serious these groups and their 'Turkish' sponsors are.
So far, Turkey under Erdogan has persisted in its aggressive policies against the Syrian people
and has continued to labor under the illusion that terrorism will help serve its subversive agendas

in Syria and the countries of the region. Turkey's position stands in stark contrast to the positive
and constructive role played by Russia and Iran.

Notwithstanding its commitment to the memorandum on the 'de-escalation zones', Syria
reserves the right to respond to any violation by the other party. Syria also stresses that these

zones are a temporary arrangement that must not violate the territorial unity of Syria.
The Syrian government reaffirms its commitment to the Geneva process and further

progress on that track. This process has yet to bear fhiit in the absence of a genuine national

opposition that can be a partner in Syria's future, and as countries with influence over the other
party continue to block any meaningful progress.
Mr. President,

It is truly unfortunate that these countries that block a solution in Syria are members of

this international organization, including permanent members of the Security Council.
The Syrian government has always insisted that any solution in Syria must respect

Syria's non-negotiable principles, which are a red line for all Syrians. These include the
complete rejection of terrorism, the territorial imity of Syria and its people, and the rejection of
any external interference in political decisions regarding Syria's future. Only Syrians have the
right to make such decisions, whether now or in the future.
Ladies and gentlemen,

For decades, Israel has continued its unscrupulous thuggish actions with full impunity.

This usurper entity has occupied Arab territories in Palestine and the Golan for more than
seventy years and has committed horrific crimes against innocent civilians. Israel did not stop

there. It has publicly interfered in the Syrian crisis since its early days. Israel has provided all
forms of support to Takfirist terrorist gangs, including funds, weapons, materiel, and

communication equipment. Israel has also bombed Syrian Army positions to serve terrorist
agendas. Coordination between the two was at its best when terrorist groups decided to target

Syrian air defense assets used to defend Syria against Israeli aggression. The unlimited Israeli
support to terrorists in Syria did not come as a surprise. After all, the two share the same interests
and goals. However, let me be clear: It is delusional to believe, even for a moment, that the crisis

in Syria will make us forget our inalienable right to recover the occupied Syrian Golan fully to
the lines of June 4, 1967.

For more than six years, states and parties that were behind the war on Syria, have
continued to peddle lies and falsely accused the Syrian government of using chemical weapons.

despite a confirmation by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons that Syria
has fully eliminated its chemical program. This is enough proof that there is an ill-conceived
intention to tarnish the real image of the Syrian government in the international public eye, and

come up with new excuses to continue the aggression against Syria in favorof terrorists and their
supporters. This was the case when the United States blatantly attacked the Shayrat airbase,

claiming that it contained chemical weapons used in the alleged Khan Shaykhun attack. And as
was the case alter every accusation of this kind, we confirmed our readiness to receive and
cooperate with UN investigation teams.
Ladies and gentlemen,

Certain coimtries have boasted about fighting terrorism in Syria and having the interests

of Syrians at heart. They have established 'coalitions' and held dozens of conferences under
deceiving titles, such as 'fnends of the Syrian people'. It is quite ironic that those are the same
countries that are shedding the blood of thousands of Syrians by supporting terrorists, bombing
innocent civilians, and destroying their livelihoods.
The so-called 'International Coalition' led by the US, which was created three years ago

to allegedly fight terrorist groups such as ISIL, has killed much more innocent Syrians, mostly
women and children, than terrorists and has destroyed vital infrastructure that Syrians have

worked for years to build. It has also used phosphorus bombs and other internationallyprohibited weapons before the eyes of the whole world.
We cannot understand the silence of the international community in the face of these

crimes. The international community has not condemned or sought to stop these crimes, even

though the Syrian government has made a number of appeals to the Security Council to assume

its main responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. The Syrian government
has urged the Council to implement its own resolutions on counter-terrorism, in particular
resolution 2253, and prevent the Coalition from committing more crimes against the citizens of
my country.

Ladies and gentlemen,

While the coalition failed to make any meaningful progress against the terrorist group of

ISIL, the Syrian Army, along with its allies and friends, has been able to secure real and

significant gains and drive out terrorists from large parts of the Syrian Desert. In what was
considered a strategic achievement, the Army was recently able to break the siege imposed on

the city of Deir EZZor and its people by ISIL more than three years ago. This achievement will
significantly improve the humanitarian situation in the city and contribute to the fight against
terrorism in general.

We have declared more than once that it is impossible to combat terrorism without
coordination with the Syrian government. This is the only way to make real gains in the war on
terrorism. Any presence of foreign troops on Syrian grounds, without the consent of the

government, is considered a form of occupation, a wanton aggression, and a flagrant violation of
international laws and the Charter of the United Nations.

Mr. President,

The war that the most powerful countries and terrorist groups are waging against Syria is
not only a military war. It has taken other forms, no less brutal or aggressive, to break the will of

the Sjoian people and punish it for its firm support of the Army in its efforts to defend Syria's
political independence and territorial unity. For this reason, those countries have imposed a
suffocating economic blockade on Syria, in blatant violation of international law, to destroy the
livelihoods of Syrians and increase their suffering.

These unilateral coercive measures have been imposed on vital sectors, most notably
health care services. Syria used to have an advanced health care system. Today, however,
Sjrians are denied access to many types of medicine, even those used to treat life-threatening
conditions, such as cancer. Such sanctions are a clear sign of the hypocrisy of certain countries
that shed tears over Syrians while practicing a different form of terrorism.

The refugee problem is one of the consequences of terrorism. As Syria will need the
efforts of every Syrian over the upcoming period, the Syrian government has made the retum of

Syrians to their homes a top priority. To this end, the Syrian government has embarked on a
mission to liberate and secure the areas occupied by terrorists and improve the basic living
conditions of all Syrians.
Mr. President,

Given the United Nations' failure to uphold its own Charter and the principles of

international law, we must all consider reforming this international organization to be able to

effectivelyplay its role and to defend the legitimate rights against the law of the jungle that some
are trying to impose.

Our nations yearn for a safer and more secure, stable and prosperous world. Such a world

will remain a fantasy as long as certain countries believe that they can go around, spreading
chaos, creating troubles and imposing their will with full impunity.

Ladies and gentlemen,

My country, along with its steadfast people and its brave army, supported by our loyal
allies, is marching steadily towards the goal of rooting out terrorism. The liberation of Aleppo
and Palmyra, the lifting of the siege of Deir Ezzor and the eradication of terrorism from many
parts of Syria prove that victory is now within reach.
I am confident that, when this unjust war on Syria is over, the Syrian Army will go down
in history as the Army that heroically defeated, along with its supporting forces and its allies, the
terrorists that came to Syria from many countries and received large support from the most

powerful countries of the world, including arms, funding, training, access and political cover.

Those terrorists have tried and failed to impose their backward ideology on a peaceful nation that
has been for decades a cradle of civilization.

The annals of history will recall for generations to come the achievements of the Syrian
people and their steadfastness in the face of a barbaric terrorist campaign and unjust measures,

which have compounded their suffering and deprived them of their basic needs. The Syrian
people have stood their ground, against all odds, because they knew that this was a war that
sought to eliminate their country, and with it, their own existence. They are an example to follow
by any people who might face, now or in the future, similar attempts to break their will and deny
them their freedom and sovereignty.
Thank you Mr. President.

