PERMANENT MISSION OF TAJIKISTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS
216 East 49th Str., New York, N.Y. 10017; tel: (212) 207-3315;
fax: (212) 207-3855; e-mail: tajikistanun@un.int

STATEMENT
by
H.E. Emomali RAHMON
President of the Republic of Tajikistan
at
the 72nd session of the United Nations General Assembly.
New York, 19 September 2017

Check against delivery

1

Distinguished Mr. President,
Distinguished Mr. Secretary-General,
Distinguished Delegates,
Heads of State and Government,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Mr. Miroslav Lajcak on his election as President
of the 72nd session of the UN General Assembly and wish him every success in the
implementation of his most noble duties.
May I also express my sincere appreciation to Mr. Peter Thomson for his continuous
support of Tajikistan’s national and international initiatives during his tenure of presidency at the
71st session of the UN General Assembly.
The dynamic processes of globalization over the past decades, on the one hand,
contributed to the expansion of political and economic ties among countries, to integration among
different regions of the world, and, on the other hand, brought about massive challenges to the
people of the planet.
In this context, the concerted efforts of the UN member states at ensuring safe and
peaceful life for the people have encountered serious obstacles.
In this regard, the United Nations, as a reputable and global institution is called
upon to effectively continue carrying out its mission to coordinate consistent efforts of member
states at responding to modern challenges and threats.
Mr. Chairman,
Under the circumstances, it is impossible to raise and address major issues of the day
without a comprehensive reform of the United Nations.
The reform should contribute to enhancement of the UN capacity to timely and adequately
respond to the developments around the world and to efficiently meet today’s challenges and
threats.
The principles of the UN reform should be in accord with the principles and goals of the UN
Charter, including the UN Security Council as its main body.
We call for a broad and equitable representation in the UN Security Council, particularly of
the developing countries.
Distinguished Participants,
Today we are witnessing horrific and tragic events that are taking place across the globe.
The spread of terrorism and extremism, armed inter-confessional conflicts, transnational
organized crime, and illicit drug trafficking pose a serious threat to security of the countries.
Intensification of terrorist, extremist and other radical movements in the hotbeds of the world
poses a threat to security of people on a planetary scale.

2

I wish to reiterate that the horror and brutal acts of these forces have nothing to do with holy
religion Islam. On the contrary, they go against the moral teachings, tolerance and humanistic
values of Islam.
Confronting these threats requires that all UN member states take stupendous efforts, in
compliance with the international law, and refrain from double standards.
The Government of Tajikistan, continues taking consistent concrete steps to address threats
and challenges, and to ensure peace and stability in the country, in cooperation with its partners
and international organizations, particularly the relevant UN agencies,
Implementation of the second phase of the Tajik’s National Strategy 2020 on
counteracting terrorism and extremism is one of the effective instruments we use to carry out our
commitments.
The UN central and coordinating role in development and implementation of timely
measures for addressing conflicts in the hotbeds over the world has acquired a greater importance.
The success of our joint actions to prevent and resolve conflicts, to seek for peaceful ways of
crises and disputes settlement, primarily depends on how effective we use the instruments of
preventive diplomacy and mediation.
In this regard, Tajikistan believes that the problem of the Democratic Republic of Korea
can be resolved through continued constructive negotiations, by peaceful means and within the
framework of a bona fide implementation of the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council.
We regard peace and stability as guarantors of sustainable social and economic development,
dignified and peaceful life, creation of favorable conditions for further development of civil
society, and observance and protection of human rights in each of UN member-states.
We, Tajiks, are well aware of the value of peace and the need to defend it. Our people
experienced numerous hardships in the first years of the country’s independence. As a result of
the imposed civil conflict thousands of citizens of our country lost their lives.
Only through peace and stability in the society we had been able to achieve sustainable
economic development, reduce poverty and improve people’s well being.
On this basis, by promoting multilateral and mutually advantageous cooperation with many
countries of the world we undertook the necessary steps to ensure regional integration.
Mr. Chairman,
We cannot remain indifferent to the military, political, and socio- economic situation in
the neighboring Afghanistan, which raises our grave concern.
Today it is obvious that sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan are key to ensuring
stability and security in Central and South Asia and other neighboring regions.
In this regard, we consider it essential that the international community continue
coordinate its efforts and adopt effective measures for a comprehensive resolution of the Afghan
problem.
In this regard, it is important to get Afghanistan involved in the process of regional
integration through strengthening economic and trade relations with this country.
We call on the international community to render targeted assistance and support to
Afghanistan in restoring its social and economic life and developing transportation and
communication infrastructure.
3

Tajikistan, which shares 1400 kilometers of border with Afghanistan is willing to make
its contribution to this honorable endeavor.
Transport and road connectivity of both countries, implementation of power transmission
lines’ projects, including CASA-1000, training and professional development of experts in
different areas, these are just a few areas, which are currently in the focus of Tajikistan’s
attention.
Combating illicit drug trafficking, which is among the main sources of funding
international terrorism, needs joint efforts of the international community, regional and
international organizations.
To this end, Tajikistan has established efficient cooperation with the relevant UN
agencies, regional organizations, as well as with partner countries at the bilateral level.
Currently, the National Strategy 2020 on combating illicit drug trafficking is being
successfully implemented in the country.
Mr. Chairman,
Adoption of 2030 Agenda by the international community is a milestone for sustainable
development and involves all sectors of society to this process.
Tajikistan over the past years made a great stride towards implementation of Sustainable
Development Goals.
The Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, in cooperation with the relevant UN
agencies, has developed and adopted a Mid-Term Development Strategy 2020 and National
Development Strategy 2030.
The strategies have been developed in line with the Global agenda on sustainable
development, and we believe that their timely and effective implementation will contribute to the
achievement of the global Sustainable Development Agenda.
Tajikistan was among 44 countries, which presented their Voluntary National Review last
July during the High Level Political Forum on sustainable development.
To ensure successful implementation of Agenda 2030 it is necessary to help least
developed and developing countries to participate through providing support especially in the
area of financial support and advanced technologies. In our opinion, increasing Official
Development Assistance still remains one of the main issues of the day.
It is worth mentioning that geographical location of the land locked developing countries
and lack of access to sea pose serious obstacles to their sustainable development.
In such circumstances, these countries need much more assistance of developed countries
and international financial institutions in their efforts to develop infrastructure, to improve transit
transport systems, simplify trade policies and regional integration.
For this reason, joint global development requires comprehensible partnership at all levels.
In this regard, the UN bodies especially the Economic and Social Council, can and should
also play an important role.
We also call on the developed countries and international structures to ensure favorable
conditions for labor migrants in receiving states and support the countries of origin in creating
new jobs.
We are convinced that greater focus on urgent economic, social and ecological issues
would contribute to the timely implementation of 2030 Agenda.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

4

Two years ago we adopted the Paris Climate Agreement, whose comprehensive goals and
targets identify obligations and efforts of the international community at adaptation to the climate
change and transition to a “green” economy.
Regrettably, as a result of climate change the number of natural disasters is on the rise in
dozens of countries around the world, and not all of them have the capacity to ensure relevant
protective measures.
In this regard, we suggest to enhance the mechanisms for providing comprehensive
assistance to the countries affected by the natural disasters, and to this end, establish international
and regional funds.
With 93 percent of its territory covered by mountains, Tajikistan, due to its geographical
location, also remains vulnerable to destructive consequences of natural disasters.
Every year our country witnesses various kinds of natural disasters, including those related
to water that cause damage to the national economy worth hundreds of millions US dollars, and
claim human lives.
Climate change accelerates melting of glaciers that brings about the rise of water level in
rivers, which, in its turn, has a negative impact on the main sectors of national economy,
particularly, hydro energy, agriculture and industry.
In Tajikistan over the last 30 years, more than 1,000 glaciers out of the total 13 thousand,
have already degraded.
And this happens at the time when the capacity of Tajikistan to use industry - the main
source of carbon dioxide emission- is not that huge, and 98 percent of the country's energy is
produced at hydroelectric power stations that generate environmentally sound energy.
Currently, 60 percent of the Central Asia water resources are formed on the territory of
Tajikistan.
This means that the continued acceleration of glaciers melting can negatively affect the
process of water resources formation in the region.
In this regard, time has come for us to translate words into actions and implement the
goals of the Paris Agreement.
Based on this Agreement Tajikistan is currently developing National Strategy on
Adaptation to Climate Change.
In our opinion, at this stage, one of the ways to achieve the Paris Agreement goals is to
adhere to the recommendation of the "pure" economy and efficient use of renewable energy
sources.
In this context, we reiterate our commitment to the global initiatives "Sustainable Energy
for All" and the International Decade "Sustainable Energy 2014- 2024"
Mr. President,
Tajikistan is strongly committed to continue its contribution to the implementation of the
UN water agenda.
It is with great delight I note that in December 2016, the UN General Assembly adopted
by consensus the Resolution entitled “International Decade of Action “Water for Sustainable
Development, 2018-2028”.
We are confident that an implementation of the new Decade at the national, regional and
international levels will contribute to the achievement of the water-related sustainable
development goals and will help to preserve this invaluable resource for future generations.
This morning, we have conducted a High-level Event, entitled “Towards Implementation
of the International Decade of Action “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018-2028 at the
5

UN Headquarters, where participants exchanged their views on effective ways and mechanisms
for advancement of the new International Decade and achieving the SDG-6 .
Furthermore, in order to review and deliberate on proposals and adopt Action Plan for the
Decade, we intend to organize on World Water Day, 22 March 2018, in New York a special
event on the occasion of launching the International Decade for Action “Water for Sustainable
Development, 2018-2028”, and host a High-level International Conference on Water for
Sustainable Development in Dushanbe next June.
We have a strong conviction that UN member states, international and regional
organizations, international financial institutions, civil society, think tank organizations, women
and youth will work together to implement the goals and objectives of the Decade to ensure
dignified life of the people around the globe and for a better, safer and more secure life of future
generations.
Thank you for your attention.

6

