As of 21 Sep. 2017 @ 23.45 hrs.

Statement of His Excellency Mr. Don Pramudwinai
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Thailand
at the General Debate of the 72"d Session
of the United Nations General Assembly
on "Focusing on people: strivingfor peace and a decent life for all
on a sustainable planet"

at the United Nations Headquarters, New York, United States of America
September, 2017
Mr. President,

/

1. I am sure I speak on behalf of everyone here that our hearts and prayers are

witti everyone in the Caribbean now facing the devastating effects of hurricanes,
especially in Dominica and Puerto Rico. Our prayers are also with people of
• Mexico in the aftermath of the deadly earthquake on Tuesday.
Mr. President,
2. Over the past few days, the words "we the peoples" have been echoed in

this august assembly many times. Thailand shares the view of Secretary General
Guterres and many member states that we need to focus more on the people and
less on bureaucracy. The United Nations must be less about debates but more
about actions and can truly impact changes on the ground.

3. At the General Assembly this year, it is gratifying to hear world leaders
focusing on people. Indeed, the life, survival, 'ond prosperity of a nation depend
on the quality of life of its people. When people live decent lives, they thrive,
and in turn nations and our planet prosper. On the other hand, if people are still
struggling with their daily lives, having nothing to eat, nowhere to sleep, no
schooling or healthcare access,• then the advancement of nations would be an

unrealizable ambition. That is why we must focus on people.
4. In fact, we have long focused on the people in Thailand. Our Late King,
His Majesty King Bhumibol Adulyadej, told us to listen to the people and to learn
from them. He said that those living in the community know best about their
conditions and needs. Development must not be top-down but bottom-up, and

must vary according to specific contexts. His Majesty laid the groundwork on this
people-centered approach through the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy (SEP),
which stresses self-development and places emphasis on everyone's potential to
mold one's own furore and live in harmony with nature. When each person can

contribute meaningfully to his or her community, the life of the nation will surely
begood.

-2-

5. Based on the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy, the Royal Thai
Government envisions the lives of our people and the life of our nation to become
"Stable, Prosperous, and Sustainable". Our key national frameworks, namely the

2017 Constitution, the 20-Year National Strategy Framework, the 12th National
Economic and Social Development Plan have all been formulated to focus first
on people. Thailand has stepped up efforts to put in place a decentralized areabased development policy to empower those who will be affected and create a
space to appreciate local wisdom and knowledge.
6. At the same time, Thailand is seeking to utilize Science, Technology, and
Innovation to strengthen human capability and foster an enabling environment in
our development paradigm. Currently, we aim to build a value-based economy
under the "Thailand 4.0" policy. The value-based economy encompasses a

circular economy, in which resources are utilized efficiently and in an
environmentally friendly manner; a distributive economy where development is
inclusive; and an innovative economy where growth springs from ideas and
knowledge. This value-based economy under Thailand 4.0 requires human
wisdom even more than high technology. And that is why we are focusing on our
people and putting human life cycle development as our priority.
7. Since 2002, we have successfully embarked upon our Universal Health
Coverage System (UHC). UHC is an investment in our people and our future. At
present, 99.87 per cent of the population enjoys some kind of health coverage.
The UHC has helped prevent over !00,000 households from falling into poverty
over the past decade. As Chair of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative,
Thailand will present a draft resolution at this UNGA session to mark 12
December as World UHC Day. We hope to receive support from member states
in this regard.
8. Another recent example of how we focus on people is our National

Strategy on Elimination of HIV/AIDs (2017-2030). By 2030, Thailand aims to
reduce new HIV infections, reduce HIV/AIDs related deaths, and cut down
discrimination related to HIV and gender. We are also proud to say that in 2016
the World Health Organization recognized Thailand as the first country in Asia
and second country in the world to eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV
and syphilis.
Mr. President,

9. The world is going through a critical time, facing a series of common
challenges, such as extremism, terrorism, ongoing conflicts, and irregular
migration, along with environmental degradation, climate change, and natural
disasters. Another grave concern is the nuclear threat which is looming over us
and feels more realnow than ever before. It is at times like these that humanity is
being truly tested.

3
10.Two days ago Thailand signed and deposited our instrument of ratification
to the Nuclear Weapons Ban Treaty. We are proud to be among the first countries
to do so. We wish to call on others to do the same. By doing so, we are sending
out our message to our children and grandchildren that we do care.
Mr. President,
11. Thailand shares the international community's grave concern over

the situation in the Korean Peninsula, and the recent nuclear and missile tests by
the DPRK. We encourage all parties to find a peaceful solution, along with full
implementation of UNSC Resolutions.
12. Thailand is also deeply concerned about ongoing violence and conflicts
elsewhere in the world. And as a neighboring country, Thailand cannot turn
blind eyes to the situation in the Rakhine State, which recently forced hundreds
of thousands to leave their homes. We are fully aware of the complexities of
these humanitarian situations that cannot be solved overnight. These situations
call for long-term political and socio-economic solutions. Sustaining peace and

sustaining development must go hand in hand.
Mr. President,

13. To enable people to have decent lives, we must build inclusive societies
where every person has a sense of belonging and feel that their voices are heard
and their views counted. We must empower the most vulnerable in our societies -

those suffering in poverty, women, children, persons with disabilities - and leave
no one behind. Their rights and dignity must be respected. They must be
protected by law and have equal access to justice. Only then can we realize a
truly inclusive society with sustainable peace and development.
Mr. President,

14. Multilateralism and the United Nations, in particular, have a great role to
play in fostering the quality of our people's lives. The United Nations must take
transformative steps to live up to today's reality and expectations. Development
programs, financial and technical assistance, peace operations, security sanctions,
resource mobilization, environmental protection programs - all of these must

truly enhance the quality of life of the people.
15. The work of the United Nations must have real impact on the ground. The
United Nations must be able to identify challenges based on the needs and
particular situations of each country, and must be able to adapt its work in a
responsive and flexible manner. It must also address the root cause of each
problem, especially by addressing structural gaps and working more on
prevention, rather than only curing the symptoms.

4
16.We look forward to hearing more details on the UN Development System
reform, and how it would impact changes on the ground, enhance resource
efficiency, and synergize works of regional commissions and UN country teams.

We also wish to hear about innovative resource mobilization and enhanced
partnerships with all stakeholders, especially the private sector, academia, and
civil society. Partnerships, particularly with Science, Technology, and
Innovation communities would bring about the transformative push required for
achieving SDGs.
17. We must learn to mobilize the diverse strengths of each and every one
of us. We must ensure that local wisdom and community knowledge are
appreciated and integrated into our efforts. We must create a culture of
partnerships based on mutual trust and respect.

18. On our part, Thailand recognizes and appreciates the diversity of strengths
of each stakeholder. We value the sharing of knowledge and experiences. It is in
this spirit that Thailand has lmmched the "SEP for SDGs Partnership" to
encourage the sharing of theSufficiency Economy Philosophy in advancing
SDGs. As part of our efforts to promote South-South cooperation, last year,

Thailand supported the reopening of the UN Office for the South-South
Cooperation for Asia and the Pacific in Thailand and has provided human
resources to the Office.
Mr. President,

19. Last but not least, focusing on the people is not only about working on
external conditions. The first step of a successful transformation is to work on the
mindsets, especially of children and youth. We must not forget them. Their
voices must be heard. The future belongs to them. Therefore, we iiaust ensure

that children today grow up to become citizens of the world with global mindsets.
20. Everyone can be an agent of change. If one can have a decent life, feeling
content with what one has, eventually that person will want to give and to share.
Our role as governments, Mr. President; is to support the people, creating an
enabling environment for them to be able to give and to share, and let the people
driveihe change.
21. I thank you, Mr. President.

