PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
STATEMENT OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT
DELIVERED BY THE REPRESENTATIVE OF HIS HIGHNESS THE AMIR
OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT HIS HIGHNESS SHEIKH JABER AL MUBARAK AL HAMAD AL SABAH
PRIME MINISTER OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT
BEFORE THE SEVENTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
GENERALDEBATE UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS - NEW YORK
WEDNESDAY, 20 SEPTEMBER 2017

Mr. President, Your Excellencies, Mr. Secretary-General, Ladies and Gentlemen,
THE PEACE, MERCY AND BLESSINGS OF ALLAH BE UPON YOU
On behalf of the Government and people of the State of Kuwait, it pleases me at the outset, to extend our sincere congratulations to you personally, and your friendly country, the Republic of Slovakia, on your election as President of the 72nd Session of the United Nations General Assembly. I would also like to assure you of my country's support in all actions you undertake to facilitate your work and the fulfillment of your responsibilities. We are fully confident that your vast experience in international issues will contribute valuably to the conduct of the work of this session. In addition, ! would like to avail myself of this opportunity to express my sincere appreciation for the outstanding work of your predecessor, Ambassador Peter Thompson, during his capable and successful presidency of the previous session.
Allow me also to take this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr Antbnio Guterres, for the deserved trust he has earned for himself and for his friendly country, the Republic of Portugal, from the international community, embodied by his recent election as Secretary-General of the United Nations, in process of unprecedented transparency in the history of the United Nations. We would like to wish His Excellency success in serving the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, as well as in all endeavors to consolidate peaceful coexistence between nations, maintain international peace and security, and reinforce international cooperation in all fields, inciuding, the follow up of the implementation of the goals and objectives of sustainable development.

In this respect, we would be remiss if we fail to mention the vital and effective role of his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-Moon, during the past ten years, and the great achievements realized during his tenure, such as the Climate Change Agreement, and the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals, and other distinguished accomplishments.
Mr. President,
The State of Kuwait firmly believes in the vital and effective role of the United Nations and its various bodies, agencies and programs, to face up to increasing global challenges and risks. In that light, we welcome the proposals and plans put forward by the Secretary-General to restructure the Secretariat, aimed at making it a more coherent body and promoting its effectiveness and efficacy in ensuring the coordination and streamlining of its activities in the fields of maintaining international peace and security and the follow up of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
We renew our call for the necessity of reforming the Security Council to reflect the new international reality in a manner that would reinforce its representation, credibility and legality, and would also ensure permanent Arab representation commensurate with the number of Arab States and their contribution in supporting the different activities of the United Nations.
What is worrisome are the challenges and risks we are witnessing in different regions of the world, such as the spread of the phenomenon of violence, extremism and terrorism, as well as the risks of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and the threat of their use, in addition to the violations of human rights, as currently taking place in Myanmar, of the rights of the Rohingya Muslim minority which we call for the immediate cessation of all acts of prosecution practiced against them, and granting them their rights to citizenship and decent living.
The position of the State of Kuwait in condemning terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is principled & constant. We support all international actions and measures designed to combat terrorism and eliminate all terrorist

organizations. Kuwait also contributes significantly to the provision of logistical support to the international alliance against extremist groups.
The practices of the so called ISIL group undoubtedly violates the most basic principles of human rights and threatens, if not challenged and left with drained resources of funding, to become a real danger to international peace and security.
It is regrettable that the Middle East region has the greater share of challenges with multiple reasons and diversity of means, which makes it imperative that international efforts be combined to meet such dangerous phenomena and concentrate on addressing their root causes, so as the world can enjoy security & stability, due to the fact that such challenges and risks threaten the very essence of international peace and security, and where the majority of the victims are civilians.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The brotherly Republic of Iraq, which is facing significant security, political and economic challenges, the most prominent of which is its confrontation with and combating terrorist organizations and extremist groups that attempt to exploit the Islamic region and distort the Islamic doctrine, to achieve illegitimate goals and objectives, aimed at spreading chaos, wreaking havoc and inciting hatred and extremism.
In this respect, we congratulate the Government and people of lraq on victories that its forces are achieving on the ground in battling ISIL, and on their liberation of numerous areas that were under the control of ISIL. We hope those victories will continue until the total liberation of the remaining areas still under the control of ISIL, thus promoting national reconciliation efforts among the various elements of the Iraqi people, and leading to the restoration of peace and stability in Iraq, and to the maintenance of its unity, independence and territorial integrity, as well as creating the appropriate environment for starting the efforts of rebuilding and reconstruction, and the return of the refugees to their homes.

In this context, and responding to calls to provide humanitarian and development assistance, the State of Kuwait intends, in cooperation and coordination with iraq and the international community, to host an international donors conference during the coming year to rebuild the devastated areas and provide all forms of support to help iraq fulfill all of its remaining obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions, and would help Iraq regain its regional and international role and standing,
Mr. President,
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the occupation of the Palestinian territories in 1967. This the only Arab cause that had been saturated with United Nations resolutions, international and regional initiatives, without ever being implemented, due to the intransigence of the Israeli occupying power, and its explicit and blatant refusal to implement the resolutions of international legitimacy, most recent of which, is Security Council resolution 2334, that confirmed that the Israeli settlement activities are illegal and illegitimate, and called for their cessation, as they undermine the prospects of reaching a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.
The State of Kuwait confirms its condemnation of the Israeli violations that took place lately at AI Haram AI Sharif (AI Aqsa Mosque) in Jerusalem, in a new attempt to alter the existing historical status, and rejects categorically all the illegal Israeli policies, plans and practices that aim for the judaization of the holy city, erase its Arab identity, disrupt its demographic structure, and isolate it from its Palestinian perimeter. Such violations represent a flagrant threat to international peace and security, and are contrary to the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as the 4th Geneva Convention of 1949.
From this premise, we appeal to the international community and to the Security Council to abide by their responsibilities, and continue to pressure Israel to implement the United Nations resolutions, leading to the attainment of all the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people, and the recognition of their own independent state, over their own territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital, along the borders of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the concept of land for peace, and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Mr. President,
It is regrettable that since the onset of the crisis in Syria, we have been facing horrifying facts and figures of the ongoing conflict, confirming that destruction is the theme of the continuing conflict in Syria, the economic social and humanitarian impact of which can neither be evaluated or calculated, but will unfortunately contribute to the loss of an entire generation of our brothers in Syria. The number of fatalities in this conflict has exceeded 400,000, with nearly 12 million Syrians, who are either displaced or refugees, in addition to massive destruction of property and infrastructure in the majority of provinces.
Proceeding from its moral and humanitarian responsibilities, the State of Kuwait hosted three international donor conferences in 2013, 2014 and 2015, in support of the humanitarian situation in Syria, and co-chaired the 4th international donor conference, held in London in February 2016, as well as the 5th international donor conference held in Brussels, in April 2017. During those conferences, my country's voluntary contributions are estimated to be $1.7 Billion, the bulk of which was given to specialized agencies of the United Nations, and to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations dealing with humanitarian affairs.
Despite the efforts exerted in both the political and humanitarian tracks of the conflict in Syria, those efforts did not change to a large measure of the reality on the ground, which makes us more aware than ever before, that our convictions and position, correspond to what we had advocated from the beginning, that this crisis cannot be resolved by military means.
The pace of the political track is still slow, and since the issuance of the Communiqu of the first Geneva Conference, over which there were sharp differences in the interpretation of its content, we have witnessed six rounds of Syrian talks in Geneva, over the period of five years between the different parties without achieving any progress; which requires that we intensify the efforts to bring together the parties to the conflict, to hold direct talks aimed at finding a peaceful settlement, in accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2254, leading to the creation of a political reality, which would maintain the unity, independence and sovereignty of Syria, as well as realizing the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

} f f P ,  .r  , f -. ,<,   I ,  -." .
Ladies and Gentleman,
The sisterly Republic of Yemen has been experiencing a difficult phase in its history, since the coup by the Houthi militias and the followers of the former President against the legitimate authority, and the refusal of the rebels to implement the resolutions of the Security Council and international initiatives in order to reach a political settlement, the conflict continues to rage on.
In this connection, we would like to reaffirm our full commitment to the unity of Yemen, and the respect of its sovereignty and independence, as well as rejecting any interference in its internal affairs, and asserting the support and backing of the constitutional legitimacy, while stressing that the political solution in Yemen should be based on the three agreed upon references, i.e. the Outcomes of the National Dialogue, the Initiative of the GCC countries and its Implementation Mechanism, as well as relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly, resolution 2216.
The State of Kuwait has exerted significant efforts to peacefully resolve this conflict, and has hosted over a period of three months last year, consultations between the Yemeni parties, under the auspices of the United Nations,
In this regard, we reiterate our readiness to host our Yemeni brethren to sign on a final accord reached among them, and renew our support of the efforts of the United Nations, and of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, to reach a peaceful settlement to this crisis, thus ending the suffering of the Yemeni people who face dire humanitarian and economic conditions.
At the humanitarian level, the State of Kuwait did not overlook the humanitarian needs of the Yemeni people, under the harsh circumstances they face, and continued over the years to provide humanitarian assistance. Kuwait also participated actively in the High-Level Pledging Event for the Humanitarian Crisis in Yemen, held in Geneva, on 25 April 2017, and pledged during that event to allocate the amount of $100 million. However, we still believe that the optimal solution to address these humanitarian conditions requires the restoration of peace and stability in Yemen, in a manner that would preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Ladies and Gentlemen,
At the regional level, and within the framework of the efforts and endeavors undertaken by Kuwait to consolidate the foundations of good neighborly relations, we renew our call to the Islamic Republic of Iran to undertake serious confidence-building measures, and establish relations based on reciprocal cooperation and respect, common interests, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, and renounce practices that jeopardize the security and stability of the region, and contradict with the principles of the United Nations Charter and international law, as well as to adhere to the resolutions of international legitimacy, thus directing efforts and possibilities towards construction and development, so that all the peoples of the region can enjoy security, peace and well-being.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda faces significant challenges because of the erroneous behavioral patterns of humans over the ages, the impact of natural disasters and the greenhouse effect, that doubles our international responsibility, so that it has become incumbent upon us to do our utmost to fully implement the Agenda, requiring that we all enhance the mechanisms of developmental partnerships, in order to keep pace with the needs and requirements, of sustainable development, thus our fulfillment of our international commitments and solidarity at the global level, will constitute a real start to reach the goals of sustainable development, with the aim of eliminating all forms of poverty. In the context of the historic Paris Agreement, the impact of climate change represents one of the biggest impediments to achieving sustainable development, according to the principle of shared but differentiated responsibility.
The State of Kuwait is steadily forging ahead under the leadership of His Highness, Sheikh Sabah AI Ahmad AI Jaber AI Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait, towards implementing the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda by mainstreaming its goals in Kuwaiti national development plans and programs, with the involvement of all sectors of civil society and partners, which my country has embodied in its development plan for the future under the theme of "New Kuwait" 2035, through seven basic pillars that aim to transform Kuwait into a leading financial, commercial, cultural and institutional hub.
7

The State of Kuwait has consistently shouldered its regional & international responsibilities, to achieve development in its various economic, social, and environmental dimensions. We have come a long way on the path of implementing the lofty initiatives of His Highness, the Amir, for the advancement of international partnerships, and reinforcing the history of Kuwait's previous endeavors in the humanitarian and developmental field. The State of Kuwait has not spared any efforts in its endeavors to provide developmental assistance to developing and least developed countries, totaling, to date, 106 countries, through its various institutions, most prominent among which is the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, by offering grants and soft loans to fund infrastructure projects in developing countries, worth more than double the percentage agreed upon internationally.
Mr. President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Before I conclude my statement, allow me to express to you all the gratitude and thanks from the Government and people of the State of Kuwait for the trust you have placed in my country by electing it a non-permanent member in the Security Council for the period 2018-2019 last June.
After almost forty years of Kuwait's first non-permanent membership in the Security Council during the period 1978-1979, we return today to renew our commitment to strengthening the role of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and security, and the prevention of conflicts, as well as supporting mediation efforts and endeavors for the peaceful settlement of conflicts. We are also committed to support efforts to make it more transparent, and promote the participation of small states in the work of the United Nations and its bodies.
We will strive to support and activate the international response to refugees and immigrant crises, and all other humanitarian crises arising from the worsening wars and conflicts in recent years, while hoping that peace and security prevail all over the world.
Thank you Mr. President.

