PERMANENT MISSION OF THE EPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS TO THE JNiTED NATIONS
ew :York
72a United Nations Ge eral!Assembly - General Debate Hon, Mr. olm Silk
Minister of reign Affairs & Trade Republic ol the Marshall Islands
23 S ptember 2017
United ] ations New York
check against delivery
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, Excelle: cies,i Ladies & Gentlemen,
I have the honor to convey the warm greeting ofokwe on behalf 0fthe government and people of the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
Mr. President,
I congratulate you on your election, and I n proud that your predecessor from the Pacific, Peter Thomson, will continue his service to the UN s the oceans envoy.
I also extend the condolences of nay govemm mt for the destruction and tragic loss from recent natural disasters in Mexico, the United States, Pmtigu & Barbuda, Cuba, Haiti, the Bahamas, Dominica, Haiti, the territories of the US and British Virgin I .andgl Puerto Rico, St. Barth, Amguilla, Turks & Caicos, and other islands.
M: President,
The United Nations stands strong as the onl" place that we - all of us in the world, have to meet our starkest challenges together. Even if preseni moments in the world appear uncertain, all must remain confident and committed to ensure this body ill speak for those who might not otherwise have such a
voice.
Mr, President,
Recent events regarding North Korea and it'., growing nuclear threat must serve as an obvious mandate for strong and urgent global cooperation an effective action. The Marshall Islands is a small island nation in the Pacific - and, by oreselves, w wish for only peace, security and stability for the world. We cannot ignore the sudden and evident thr, at tolthe territory of Guam, our close neighbor, friend, and the home of some of our Marshallese citizer . Aithreat posed to Guam is a threat to the wider Pacific Islands region. And we further express our s :rious concern for the challenges these actions have posed to the peace, security and political cooperati( n across the wider Pacific rim,

The government of the Republic of the Mar aall ilslands at it's highest levels loudly condemns the recent nuclear test of September 3rd, and relat, d actions - without debate, these are clear violations of UN Security Resolutions, and are serious hallenges to the international disarmament and nonproliferation regime based on the Treaty on N n-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. I am appalled that - of all countries - the Marshall Islands - is a in facing the very real threat of an atmospheric nuclear test over the Pacific ocean.
Mr. President,
The Republic of the Marshall Islands has con, mngd these testing efforts not just for our own security, but because we kaaow the impacts firsthand. 'he 67 nuclear tests in my country - conducted between 1946 md 1958 - have produced a legacy bur n w}fich we hope no other nation or people should ever have to bear. These tests were conducted und our UN Trusteeship - a time when this institution was charged with. our welfare and well-being. henI our Marshallese leaders traveled to New York to present two petitions to urgently halt nuclea testing - in 1954 and 1956 - the UN responded with Trusteeship Resolutions 1082 and 1493, whi( h are the only time my UN organ has ever specifically authorized nuclear tests. The consequences ot this !gnorance were - and are - beyond horrific.
Our people and environment have suffered ts no other people should - and these legacy impacts remain today as stark and present challenges, assed down through generations of mother to daughter, father to son. For these reasons, the UN Spe, al Rapporteur on Human Rights & Toxic Waste in 2012 outlined clear human rights implications and i :sponsibitities - Which we affirm.
Mr. Secretary-General, I thank you for your h .er to the Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum this August, stating t,hat "finding a solution to this issue s critical for the future of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and assuring us that relevant UNent ies stand ready to respond to requests for assistance.
Mr. President,
Recent events should create far greater politfl tl resolve to curb and ultimately eliminate global nuclear threats. But if it were a task so easily done, p :rha!s the world would not have struggled for so long. In this regard, the Republic of the Marshall Isla: ds supports those nations who are now able to affirm the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapor , and we will continue to add our own voice in all fora, including the CTBT and NPT. We are corn nitted to a close and inclusive examination of our own participation in the Nuclear Ban treaty, lister ng c!osely to our stakeholders and affected communities, and also taking into account any possible i @ications on our mutual security relationships. It will always remain our fervent hope that such w apoSs of mass destruction shall never again be tested or unleashed, and that all nuclear-armed nations rill have the necessary political wilt to disarm.
Mr. President,
Earlier this year, my country experienced tt tragic loss of our Iongtime Minister and climate change Ambassador Tony deBrum, and I wish to press my gratitude for those who have conveyed their condolences. Tony once said that for the !arshalt Islands, "we are suffering the effects of climate change and of the nuclear legacy, and we ve liad nothing to do with either. In either case, people have to choose to end this world, this univen, You can either do it slowlY with climate change, or you can press a button and blow it up, and neithe is justified."

Mr. President,
Just across from the United Nations, in the E :t River, there sits Belmont Island - a small, rocky little beacon only 1 meter tall. This island in New York must now be a reminder for the world's diplomats that if you ever see it vanish in the rising sea - know that you have also lost the Marshall Islands, and the Pacific.
Mr. President,
Climate change is real - no credible scientist v oulcbe able to make a sound claim otherwise. But what we see with our own eyes in our low-lying isl ads reveals a real, present and growing threat to our own survival and security as a nation and member f the UN. We welcome the Paris Agreement's entry into force. This still stands as a truly lasting, arab :iousl, long-term agreement - and we must not allow our mutual confidence to be thrown off by any .lortqterm bumps. We urge further ratification and full participation in the Montreal Protocol's Kigali kmehdment - which was a legacy and the persona! drive of the late Minister-in-Assistance to the Pro :ident of the Marshall Islands, Mattlan Zackhras, who tragically and suddenly passed away last monl . A the end of a long night of negotiations last year, the late Minister Zackhras said it would be a prou ca!i home to his children the night the amendment was adopted. He said that because he knew the gali Amendment could mean the difference between if our country- and their future - would exist - r not.
Mr. President,
We strongly support the leadership our Paci: isiand neighbor Fiji as the incoming President of the UNFCCC's Conference of Parties, and unde: their trust and guidance all parties will adopt a strong rulebook. The Paris agreement is only as stror g as the political confidence which stands behind it - and it is beyond imperative that, even in thes : early moments, committed nations are starting the challenging task of pushing ourselves to do ex m more.
! Even with our limited resources, the Marshal Islands is committed not only to implementation, but to explore where our own action on energy ca1 be strengthened - and if we can do it, so can everyone else. We must match our own ambition ot emissions with stronger approaches, and close bilateral work, which better ensures that we are bui ling i infrastructure for a truly resilient future -tO look beyond the distant multilateral resolutions, ar t knw with eyidence that we and our partners are giving our youngest and future generations every ol ce Of effort to leave with them a legacy worthy of their trust.
Mr. President,
The Republic of the Marshall Islands stron ly agrees with the widespread call from the large and growing chorus of our fellow member state - that a more effective and efficient United Nations is beyond necessary. We support the Secretar -General to act, under his own authority, to continue to initiate practical but powerful efforts to redu :e dtiplication, and improve delivery. These are not only about the use of public funds - including o : own - but also about all of us improving our ability to achieve our full potential, and making clear p ogress towards the SDGs. We cannot do it alone, and we cannot do it with an international architectul wtich, however good the intentions, has too often lost the focus needed to help us make the c mec[ions between these powerful halls and our local communities.

Before we engage in an impossible fight over souces, we must first examine the use of the resources already at hand. Our small in-country joJ at presence office struggles with access to seasoned international staff to help us learn to navigat : the!system. Our UNDP Resident CQordinator for the Marshall Islands is actually a resident of ant Lher ation nearly - 3 thousand kilometers away. This resident coordinator, who is fully dedicated t( her ission, is also tasked with being coordinator of 8 other remote island nations - where she also s not a resident. We must reexamine the management decisions which led to this outcome. Smal! island developing states will realize serious barriers to implementing the SDGs without a stronger foc s from the UN system.

Mr. President,

This past June's UN Conference on Oceans an SDG 14 stands as a watershed moment ofpolitica! will. But these good words too often fall short in g )hal and regional decisions on oceans and fisheries. The Pacific small island developing states have s, unded the alarm on the state of world oceans which all have heard - but not loud enough. We have the potential in the Pacific, as the Parties to the Nauru Agreement and beyond, to effect a step-chanl e in the world tuna market - to dramatically change our own economic trajectory, and boost global fo, d security along the way. The UN system itself must do
far more to help us focus closely on this transt )traCtive opportunity.

And even if some of our partners are still slc v to '.rise with us, the marketplace is already leading the way. And what the Pacific region is doing fo] tuna - to boost sustainable practices and ensure our own participation at the same time - we are als , doing with wider oceans. Increasingly, our political partners will come to find that our political s lppot wilt rest closely not upon their own pressure, but the extent of their political will to follow ou lea On sustainable oceans and fisheries. And while it may be our own Pacific economic and enviro me1{tal survival at stake, it is also a finn push to the rest of the world to ensure that two third's of our t; anetls surface is no longer in peril.

i
Mr. President, i

If indeed no one is to be left behind in the SD }s, ad to fulfill our UN Charter, than we should consider

that the exclusion of Taiwan from the UN a1 d it'sl related agencies has created a major challenges for

both the government and people of Taiwan ir thei{ pursuit of their fundamental right to participate. As

in my own nation; Taiwan is an indispensat le pm-tner for the international community, including on

humanitarian aid, medical assistance, diseas preqention, environmental protection, anti-terrorism and

trackling transnational crime. Pragmatic apl

oactles could allow us to work through controversy, md
i'

achieve global benefit tlzrough universal parti :ipation, including at ICAO, the UNFCCC and the WHO.

UN resolution 2758 of !971 has been mist ed o justify an exclusion which has not only literally

denied access to the people of Taiwan from e terig these doors, but steps over a powerful opportunity

to work together with a proactive contribute : to i3eace and the common global good. As the United

Nations, I believe we all can and must do be

Mr. President,

E

These may be trying times, and the challeng s of the world are severe - but it is in such adversity that

true character is defined - and if an effective 3nited Nations was ever truly needed, it is now. We must

look outward to embrace the communityo nations, rather than took inward towards our own self-

interest at the expense of everyone else. Mu] lateral engagement must be our guiding light as we move

towards a more effectiveand efficient UN.

Thank you and kommol tata.

