jT

-^

,

• \Jf 4

Statement by
The Chief Executive of The Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan

H.E. Dr. Abdullah Abdullah

73"° Session of the United nations General Assembly

United Nations, New York
September 26,2018
Check against delivery

e^jii 6^jJi

^

Madame President,

Excellencies heads-of-state and governments,
Ladies and gentlemen.
Allow me to start by extending my congratulations to you Madame

President and wishing the 73*^^ UNGA presidency much success. Let
me also assure you that working with UN member states and the UN

family, we look forward to advancing the seven priorities set in the
UNGA73 agenda.

From this podium, Iwould like to provide the General Assembly with

the latest in regard to the situation in Afghanistan - the gains,
opportunities and challenges that my nation faces at this critical
juncture - in addition to our views on other key global challenges.

The record of accomplishments by this institution over the past 73
years demonstrates that wherever it might be, and whoever it might
impact, we cannot escape the ripple effects of, or delink ourselves
from the global, national, communal and human connectivities that
bind us, whether in relation to the environment, climate, international

finance or even the cyber and technology arenas.
It is therefore critically important to go beyond Just words, duplication
of efforts or ineffective models that get inter-mingled and, at times,

spur countervailing or lopsided interests.
As Albert Einstein once said: WE CANNOT SOLVE OUR PROBLEMS
WITH THE SAME LEVEL OF THINKING THAT CREATED THEM.

Whether we are addressing hunger, acute poverty, climate change,

overpopulation, terrorism, conflict, displacement, inequality or
organized crime, we all share and own bits and pieces of the
problems, in the same manner that we collectively benefit or learn
from the solutions.

As a result, we need to explore new means and identify new tools for

reaching a wider consensus through more thoughtful dialogue and
result-oriented action.

Henceforth, to this day, we do not have a globally and officially
acceptable definition for "terrorism," a nefarious phenomenon used
by rogue or politically-connected, criminal, state or non-state actors,
using religious, ideological, economic or psychological cover to disrupt
the status-quo, upend the global and nation-state order and reach a

particular set of radical goals through the sheer use of indiscriminate
violence that no religion in its undistorted form condones.
While we are determined to fight with vigor newer versions of terror
presenting themselves as remnants of DAESH in a few pockets inside
Afghanistan, we are still struggling to fully comprehend the role that
terror breeding grounds sanctuaries and funding pools - in many
cases tied to criminal and illicit drug networks - play in the use and
spread of terrorism. We are still trying to figure out how to render

terrorism impotent as a policy tool used by some to further specific
agendas.

For example, Afghanistan has for almost a quarter of a century

experienced the loss of tens of thousands of innocent lives and major

infrastructural damage; It is partly because of geography, and partly
because of short-sighted strategies and regional agendas that have
generated an umbilical reliance on non-state actors used to keep
others unstable through violence and the promotion of extremism.
It has resulted in complacency and impunity. Thus, we need to do
more and go beyond the ineffective norms to bring about change and
accountability.

We have asked our neighboring states, especially Pakistan, to help
targeted societies - including their own - deal with this menace. We
are looking forward to the timely and effective implementation of the
recently agreed Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and

Solidarity (APPAPS).

All stakeholders need to agree to treat all shades of terrorism as one,

shut down the breeding grounds and sanctuaries and to prosecute or
repatriate the violators. The response thus far has been sparse and
insufficient. We are working with all countries near and afar to bring
about better results.

On that basis, Afghanistan stands for the balanced implementation of

all four pillars of the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy; and noncompliance must be seriously addressed as well. My country has also
begun a process of structured cooperation with the UN Office on
Counter-Terrorism and we are supportive of regional initiatives

through forums that focus on such priority concerns. We will continue
to engage and work with regional stakeholders in this regard.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.

Since we last met, Afghanistan has turned a page and made
unprecedented overtures to the Taliban to be part of a credible
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace process that could lead to a just
and comprehensive political settlement through talks and
reconciliation.

On several occasions, we have pledged our commitment to
unconditional intra-Afghan dialogue and the restoration of all rights
and privileges for those who agree to end the cycle of violence. We
even announced a unilateral ceasefire earlier this year that was
agreed to by the Taliban for a three-day period and gave the Afghans

a glimpse of what peace can look and feel like.
Unfortunately, extraneous agendas prevented us to replicate a second

ceasefire more recently. But we will not rest, and we have vowed to
pursue what is right and attainable.

I want to express my sincere thanks to all nations, especially the
United States, concerned nations and parties, including the

Governments of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Indonesia- both of
whom recently hosted Ulema gatherings-the UN and others for
encouraging all sides to set the stage for a process that would lead to
talks and a Just and comprehensive negotiated settlement.
Looking at the 25 year-long record, a pre-requisite for talks is to learn

from the history of peace engagements. We see that a dual approach
is necessary to make sure that we win the peace but also protect and
preserve our people's gains and hard-earned achievements; They

include the constitutional order, freedom of expression, human and
gender rights and creating economic opportunities.
I want to pause here and pay tribute to Afghans who continue to

suffer as a result of violence, as well as to our valiant national security
forces for their steadfast defense of our nation and for standing tall
and strong at the frontline against terrorism.
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.

Two important popular tests are ahead in Afghanistan: Parliamentary

elections slated for next month and presidential elections for next
year. Drawing on past experiences, both President AshrafGhani and I

agree that political legitimacy is derived from the will of the people.

While we pursue peace efforts and deal with security and governance
challenges, we are reminded that, eventually, we need to make sure
that, given our circumstances, the electoral process is trust-worthy
and that the electorate can agree to a fairly credible and legitimate
outcome.

Regardless of who wins or loses, Afghanistan's future rests on
nurturing national consensus that provides unity of purpose aimed at

peace and political stability deriving legitimacy from foundations that
are pluralistic, inclusive and democratic.
In this regard, I want to thank the United Nations - UNAMA in

particular - the European Union and all other contributors and donors

for helping us move the process forward.

Furthermore, we look forward to the upcoming Geneva Ministerial on

Afghanistan in November. It will be an excellent occasion to evaluate
our work and the path ahead with the donors since we last met.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
On the humanitarian front, Afghanistan also faces the daunting tasks

associated with an impending drought, refugee resettlement and
internal displacement caused by climactic and natural abnormalities,

food insecurity and security threats.

Estimated to impact two-third of the country and the livelihoods of
more than four million people, with the potential to force a million
more into migration, we are in dire to attend to their humanitarian
needs.

I want to thank the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

Affairs, other UN agencies, NGOs and donors for their contributions

and hard work on the ground, however, we urge the international
community to fully fund Afghanistan's Humanitarian Response Plan
2018-2021.

Excellencies, dear colleagues.
The peaceful settlement of disputes and protection of oppressed
peoples are core principles of the UN Charter, which benefit the

promotion and preservation of international peace and security. As a
war-ravaged country, we sympathize and feel for the people of Syria,
Yemen and other victimized communities around the world, in the

same manner that we stand for the basic rights to protection of the
Rohingya population in Myanmar. Afghanistan stands in full support of
all UN and other international efforts aimed at achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement to the question of Palestine,
including a UN General Assembly call for an international protection
mechanism for civilians.

Moreover, the UN's refined peace-building activities should provide

due focus on the principle of national ownership; implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; and promoting
greater coherence among relevant UN entities and agencies and
development.

In regard to the reform agenda, we stand in full support of efforts
aimed at strengthening the role of the UN in the context of the
Secretary General's initiatives. The creation of the Department of
Political and Peace-building Affairs is a welcome move, as is the
formation of the Office of Counter-Terrorism. We are looking forward

to the implementation of the resolution adopted on the Repositioning
of UN Development System and believe it will enhance our
achievements in the formation of One-UN in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan's active role within the UN system is currently more
pronounced than ever before. Our chairmanship of the Third
rrl

Committee during the 73 session comes at a crucial time as we have
aimed to initiate and adopted several resolutions on shared themes
that include victims of terrorism and threats of lEDs, in addition to

refugee and migrant issues, rights of children, women's

empowerment, human rights, social development, and other relevant
Committee agenda items.

Furthermore, Afghanistan's election to the UN Human Rights Council
for the first time in 2017 marked our commitment and showcased our

achievements in this regard. We remain a party to major international
protocols and conventions on human rights. I am pleased to inform
that Afghanistan has recently passed a set of national legislation

prohibiting cruel and degrading treatment, endorsed the Law
Inhibiting Torture, on Combating Human and Migrants Trafficking,
Criminal Procedures Code, and on Prohibition of Children Recruitment

in our Security Forces. On the latter, we are working closely with the
office of Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,
I want to leave this podium today by presenting a bold concept - also
recently mentioned by President Ghani - that can form a new
visionary paradigm for my country and our region as we strive to end

four decades of conflict and enter a new phase free of violence and
forced implementation of stagnant ideas and spoiler habits.
It is a concept that dwells on Afghanistan over the next few years

becoming a platform of cordiality for regional and hemispheric
cooperation, in sharp contrast to being pushed and pulled toward

becoming an area of instability and confrontation.
Our people, who pose no danger to anyone, are demanding a
fundamental change where they can play a constructive and

collaborative role across boundaries, and help turn their country into
a roundabout of people, goods, services, communications,
cooperation and ideas across the wider region.

I believe that with your help we can turn this concept into reality. We

hope to further engage our regional partners in helping us bring this
vision to fruition. I hope that this Assembly and all concerned member
states play their supportive and positive role to put an end to years of
agony and open a new path leading to durable peace,
stability and prosperity.
Thank you.

10

