MISSIO PERMANENT

DEL PRINCIPAT D'ANDORRA
A EES NACIONS UNIDES
CJ)eck against deliimy
session of the United Nations General Assembly
—speech by the Head of the Andonan Government, Antoni Maiti Petit—

New York, 28"' September 2018
Madam President,

Ivlr. Secretary-General,
Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gendcmcn,

For the people of Andorra, 2018 is a year of celebration in two ways: globally and

locally. On the 28"' of July, the Principality of Andorra celebrated 25 years since its

entry into the United Nations; and on the 10"' of December, it will be 70 years since
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

'i'hese two events have, as Thave already mentioned, a double meaning: a global one
and a local one. What some peojilc call 'glocal'. In fact, the 1948 Universal Declaration

of Human Rights has a global dimension for Andorra, as well as the other countries
that make up the international communitj'. But it also has great local roots; because
fundamcntfll rights have been respected in Andorra since rime immemorial; therefore,
it is no wonder that the Andorran Constitution expressly stales that the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights is in force in Andorra,
This is why our country has wanted to take an acdve part in the 'Stand Up for Human
Rights' campaign, emphasising the dissemination of the Important rights in the

education area. The High Cojiimissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelct —^with
whom I have had the honour of coinciding in the Ibcro-Amcrican community over

recent years— knows that slie may count on Antlorra for the Declaration made on the

10"'of December 1948 to remain as valid and sti-ong as ever.

Two United Nations Plaza, 27th Floor - New York, N.V. 10017
TcRfon (212) 750 8064, Fax (212) 750 6630

Because, as I have already said, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was already

part of Andorran positive law even beforeAndorra became part of die United Nations.
Now I would ask you to think back to what the world was like 25 years ago, when Andorra

joined this Organisation as a full member. 1993 was a time of hope for everyone: the fall of
the Iron Curtain and the end of the Cold War gave way to a wave of unprecedented
democratisation. Never had so many people in the world lived under democracy as during

the final years of the 20'"' century and the beginning of the 21** century. Human rights were
consolidated, economies grew and inequalities were gradually reducing. I'hcy were years of
peace, cooperation and multilateralism; of respect, understanding and dialogue between

cultures and religions; and around us, on the old continent, they were years of optimismin
a long, fruitful process of European construction.

Today, we all remember that period with some nostalgia. We were able to see it this
summer, during the meaningful homages paid to the Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who

did so much for peace and multilateralism at the end of the last century and beginning of
tliis millennium. And we have just seen it this week, during the Peace Summit dedicated to
Nelson Mandela, who was, without a doubt, one of the key characters of that historic
moment.

25 years on, many of the hopes of 1993 have become blurred and some of the milestones
reached have taken us backwards.

The prestigious non-governmental organisation Freedom House has noted —^year afteryear— a constant decline in world democracy since 2006. In its last report, we read that in
2017, only 4 out of every 10 people live in free countries.

This slowdecline in democratic regimes has been accompanied by an increase in inequality,
intolerance and extremism. Even in established democracies, we increasingly hear the

voices of people who have put up with discrimination in silence for many years: women,

disabled people, victims of sexual abuse or of any kind, and so on. All this shows us tliat
our optimism 25 years ago wAs rather naive.

However, despite all the deceptions and despite all the faults, all we can do is to continue
defending the international order tliat was created by the United Nations, just after the
Second World War.

Because it is an order that is based on three principles tliat arc as elemental as they are

universal: all of us have the same rights; what affects all of us must be decided by all of us;

any conflict must be solved peacefully and lawfully. When I say "all of us" I refer to
everj'body, individually, within a representative democracy; and also to all the countries, on
an equal footing, at tliis General Assembly.

Representative democracy and multilateralism are tlie result of common values and,
therefore, it is not surprising that they have a crisis at the same time.

The way I see it, democratic, multilateral order is threatened by two extremes: populism
and technocracy. In the face of complex problems, populism proposes solutions that are

simple but that are not really solutions, because they end up creating new problems and

questioning democratic principles and values. Technocracy, in the face of complex
problems, proposes solutions tliat are as complex as (hey are elitist. Solutions that are not
inclusive, that generate inequalit)' and that leave many people aside.

Populism is fed on the deception of these people who have been left aside and who have
suffered from exclusion, lack of understanding and inequality.

In recent years, we have said time and time again that the world is struggling between
opening up and closing down, between multilateralism and unilateralism, between

cooperation and protectionism. But perhaps the mistake lies in wishing to present things in
this way. All too often, defenders of multilateral order and of globalisation believe that we
have not made any errors and that it is the other people who are mistaken. Without seeing

that globalisation has created antibodies; and that not all the antibodies are harmful,
because perhaps not every kind of globalisation is good.
In the face of this dialectic between opening up and closing down, we should not seek
confrontation but look for balances. There needs to be a balance between cosmopolitanism

and being deeply rooted, because there are good things in both areas.

We have commented on the risk of protectionism, populism and closing down far too

often without realising that there is also another risk: that of elitist globalisation which is
inhuman and not very inclusive, if at all.

Very often the solutions we have found to major international questions —^whether they

ace geopolitical, economic or social— are solutions that do not consider people and that go
against one of the slogans of the United Nations, the imperative "Leaving noone behind".
Therefore, 1 view the theme chosen by the president of this General Assembly, Maria

Fernanda Espinosa —^with whom we also share the lbero-American community— very

positively: "Making tlie United Nations relevant to all people" and this means constructing
"peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies".

Ladies and Gentlemen,

lEe action of the United Nations, and by extension of the entire international community,

must be inclusive and focused on the real problems of people. Because, if this were not the

case, we would be persevering with our mistakes: we would reinforce the image of
international institutions that are difficult to understand and far removed from people, and

we would be opening thedoor to populism even wider.

This is why Andorra wants to participate in a particularly active way in promoting and
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda. These objectives are
focused on specific, tangible needs of the world population; they are large global objectives
that have local applications and impacts; and, if they are obtained, they will reinforce the
bonds that are so necessary between people and institutions.

Andorra presented the first Voluntary National Review on the Sustainable Development
Goals at the Pligh-lcvel Political Forum of the ECOSOC last July. As explained in the
review, our government has been working for some time classifying the different political
actions into the 17 sustainable development goals of the 2030 Agenda. It has also set up a

campaign to involve the education community, civil society and private companies in
promoting and achieving the various goals. This is a way of opening up and bringing the
United Nations and its agenda closer to the people.

In our opinion, innovation and the new technologies play a very important role in
acliicving tlic sustainable development goals. This is why we need a transversal alliance
between the public and the private sectors to make the technological advances available to
the 2030 Agenda.

We have assessed our level of compliance with six sustainable development goals linked to
the environment: water and sanitation; clean, accessible energy; sustainable cities;

responsible consumption and production; protecting life on liarth and combadng the
climate change. Various actions introduced by the government in recent years follow the
lines to meet these goals: the permanent improvement of water and air quality; a complete

plan ofenergy transition tliat has enabled us to reduce our dependence on the exterior and
to promote renewable energ)'; direct grants for renewing buildings using energy efficient
criteria and so on. All these actions areaimed at complying with the 2030 Agenda.

Andorra has also placed an emphasis on two more goals: measures to combat the climate
change and quality education. Because these are two things with which the Andorran
society identifies in a transversal way.

Therefore, we vindicate the validity of the Agreement on Climate Change that many

countries signed here, in New York, in April 2016; and we insist that the international
community must comply with the agreements and commitments made in Paris in
December 2015. We reiterated tliis in Paris last December, during the One Planet Summit,

promoted by the Secretary-General and by the president of the French Republic and CoPrince of Andorra, Emmanuel Macron.

Andorra is working to fiilfil the commitments of the Paris /Vgreement and strongly
encourages the rest of the international communit)' to do the same.

As far as quality education is concerned, Andorra is proud of having a rich, diverse,
integrating education system that is available to all citizens. Asystem in which families can
opt for Andorran, Spanish or French education and one which prepares our young people
to become citizens of a global world, deeply rooted in tlieir own country and own identit)'.

This is perhaps why a great deal of Andorran international cooperation effort focuses on
the area of education. Several Andorran non-governmental organisations —^with the

financial support of the government— are carr)'ing out projects to promote training and

opportunities for street children in Bolivia, to educate young girls in Honduras and to
provide schoolingfor poor children in Madagascar.

Your Excellencies,

When choosing the theme for this General Assembly, our president talks to us about
leadership and shared responsibilities: "Global leadersliip and shared responsibilities for
peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies."

This would seem to me to be a key matter: If we allow the action of the United Nations,

and by extension of the entire international community, to move away from people's real
needs, we would be losing leadersliip.

In the face of the increase in populism and extremism, political leaders often feel they are
misunderstood. However misunderstood leaders do not exist; because a misunderstood

leader is not a leader. A leader who does not connectwith the people is not a leader.

The United Nations cannot afford the luxury of disconnecting from the problems, needs,

expectations and hopes of the eitizens of this globalised world. Therefore, Andorra offers
support to the plans to reform the architecture ofthe United Nations that are being carried
out by Secretary-General Guterres and his team. A more efficient management of
resources is liighly necessary; particularly a management focused on people.

Madam President,

iVh. Secretary-General,
Friends of the international community.

Please allow me, in this final part of my speech, to make a short personal comment. Seven

and a half years ago I took on the responsibility of leading the government of the
Principality ofAndorra. Aresponsibility that the ballot boxes gave me again in March 2015.
Therefore, this will be the last time that I take part in a United Nations General Assembly.

In Andorra, the men and women of my generation started in politics coinciding with the

approval of the 1993 Constitution and witli the recognition of our country as a full
member of the international community. I was elected a member of Parliament the same

year that Andorra became a part of the United Nations.

Therefore, I am a child of that time of optimism that I mentioned at the beginning. Of

those years in which democracy was spreading, economies were growing and multilateral
institutions were strengthening. However, it was up to me and the people of my generation
to take on fuU responsibilities to govern in a time of crisis; of economic crisis, of social
crisis and of a crisis in values, at a time when whatwe believed to be solid and resistant was

proving to be fragile and unstable.

Over time, we have got used to living with this awareness offragilit)' and instability. When
all is said and done, maybe it is not so bad. Our predecessors, the old people ofAndorra,
were very aware ofthe fragility ofthe balances on which our very old institutions stand.

IfI compare it with the spirit ofoptimism of25 years ago, the symbol ofour times, oftliis
current moment, is precisely this awareness of fragility: of the economy, the institutions,
the worldwide geopolitical order, the environment, of the planet as a whole. Everything
seems to be much more fragile, in much greater danger.

From this awareness of fragility we have found the strength to undertake actions that had
been sitting on the table for years, to make reforms that had been outstanding for decades:
to have a more open, transparent and cooperative economy; to construct a more inclusive
and integrating society; to find sustainable models of growth; and to preserve the
institutions and values we had been handed down through history, adapting them and
making them useful for today's people.

Out ofnecessity we have made virtue; out ofweakness we have found strength. So tliat the
younger generations may lake the reins of their times with the same optimism we had 25
years ago.

We must work right tlirough to the last moment so that our deceptions become their hope;
so that from our mistakes they find the ability to prevent tlicm from happening again; and
so that our good choices arc the foundations on which they can continue to build peaceful,
cquilablc and sustainable societies.

And that all of us —the older generations and the younger ones— should always be aware
that cveiytliing that happens in the global area has local repercussions; and that all the
actions that we do on a local basis contribute to shaping the global society.

A global society in which everybody feels tliat theyarc listened to and included.
A global society to which Andorra —from its smallness, but also from the serenity of

centuries of peaceful existence— is fully committed. The Secretary-General, the president

of this 73"' General Assembly and all our friends in theinternational community know this.
Politicians move on, countries and institutions remain; and I'm sure that in the future you

will continue to count on the Principality of Andorra to construct a faker, safer world.
Thank you very much.

