Permanent Mission of

The Republic of Angola to the United Nations

STATEMENT BY

HIS EXCELLENCY
MR. JOAO ANUEL GON ALVES LOURENQO

PRESIDE T OF THE REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA

AT THE GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE 73rd SESSION OF

THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
NEW YORK, 26 SEPTEMBER 2018

Check against Delivery

820 Second Avenue, 12th Floor. Ne York, NY 10017

STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY JOAO MANUEL GON ALVES LOUREN O
AT THE 73rd SESSION OF THE GENEREAL ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS

New York, September 26, 2018

- Your Excellency Maria Fernanda Espinosa, President of the United Nations General
Assembly.
Your Excellency Antonio Guterres. Secretary-General of the U ited Nations.
Your Majesties,
- Your E cellencies Heads of St te and Government,
- Distinguished Representatives of international Organizations and Bodies,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

We are holding this 73rd General Assembl at special moment, as we pay tribute to two great

figures of world olitics who happen to e two Africans -Nelson Mandela and Kofi Annan.
On the da t at I complete exactly one year since my inaugurat on to t e pos of President of the

Republic of Angola, on ehalf of the Angolan people, I have the honor to address this tribune for
the first time, with the hole internation l community represented here by its highest dignitaries.

1 would like to salute Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government present here and also
the leaders from various inte ational organizations an bodies, because I consider you o be the
direct laborers for the future of our planet.

1 would like to seize this sovereign opportunity to thank all of t e international com unity for
the support rendered to the cause of eace and national reconciliation in my cou try.

A special t ank goes to the United N tions Orga ization itself hose role was decisive for the
achievement of long-lasti g peace in Angola through t e UNAVEM and MONUA. Peace

1

Missions, and the important work ndertaken by its specialized agencies, namely UNICEF and
the WFP ( World Food Program).

We also believe that Angola s experience in peaceb ilding and reconciliation between the
warrin forces has been a positive example for the United Nations, in the sense that it has
allowed to dra useful conclusions on how to approach peace processes in other regions of the
world.

Angola has a unique experience in terms of how to preserve and maintain long-lasting peace and
con tant deepening of national reconciliation, social inclusion, mutual forgiveness and healing of
wounds from an armed confl ct which ended 16 year s ago.

Your Majesties, Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen.

It is at this broad forum where we find ourselves that best solutions to the current, serious
problems and conflicts that may hinder the urvival of humanity itself are discussed and
resolved.

1 am referring to hunger and misery', which affect millions of citizens in the world, global
warming and its consequences, mass migrations, trafficking in narcotics, trafficking in human
beings, children and women for forced prostitution, religious intolerance and extremism, inter¬
ethnic aimed conflicts, or even the uncontrolled proliferation of nuclear weapons.

Established 73 years ago with the declared inte tion of restoring universal peace a d harmony, to
provide equal rights to big and small nations a d to establish a world of cooperation, progress

and ell-being, the United Nations Organization is still far from achieving the goals enshrined in
its Charter.

While it is true that right after its establishment, the i mediate bipolarization of the planet into
two antagonistic political and economic systems did not contribute to the easy enforcement o

principles that work in favor of peace and international security, t would be unfair to deny that
the UN has played an important role in bringing colonial sm to an end, promoting Hu an

2

Rights, boosting inte ational development d cooperation, and management nd control of the

ho spots of i stability worldwide.

Despite the progress made so far, we need to ackno ledge the old prevailing conflicts yet to be
solved, such as the Israel-Palestine conflict in the Middle East, the resolution of which will only
be achieved through a solution based on two-States l ving side by side peacef lly, as advocated
by the United Nations and the over elming majority of its Member States.

We welcome the endeavors t at ave been made by the United States of A erica.. North Korea

and South Korea, it the contribution of the People's Republic of China towards the
de uclearization of tire Korean pe insula, ich has considerably eased the e isti g tensions that
threatened to trigger a nuclear conflict that would likely be angerous not o ly to that region but
to international securit in general.

With the end of the so-called Cold War, symbolized by the fall of the Berlin Wall i 1989, the
momentary e ergence of a new political, paradigm oriented toward multilateralism, t e United
Nations volunteered to retake its action guided towards building a eaceful o ld order. We do

believe that with hard work from all of us we will be able to achieve such a goal.

Today, in a time of ever-increasing globalization, there is no justification for the continued
proliferation of conflicts apparently without a solution, of various dimensions in several parts of

the orld, and t at entire populations continue suffering from their tragic consequences, virtually
abandoned to their fate.

Therefore, there have been m ny voices demanding, profound reforms inside the United Nations
Organization, which is abreast of the new realities, whe eby the emergence of new centers of

econo ic and financial power, and technological and scientific advancements do fully justify the
redefinition of its structures and intervention mechanis as well as the enlargement and refo m

of its Security Council in order to better represent the different geo-political regions of the
lanet.

3

Your Majesties. Excellencies.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

The political setup of the contemporary world, where local, regional and intra-state conflict

represent international tensions and threats to peace, demands that the United Nations
Organizations play an increasi giy-active role in promoting and monitoring political, so ial and
economic democracy building processes.

This is the optimal avenue for a solution to the inte al, ethnic, religious and inter-state co flic s
arisi g in most cases fro authoritarianism, e clusion, intolerance, radicalism, or interference in

inter al affairs of sovereign States.

The current proportions of nte ational terrorism, t ansnational organized crime, ille al
immigration, xenophobia, human trafficking an drug trafficking and other evils affect the

qual ty of life of the inhabitants of the planet and demand coordination at the highest level b all
Member States of our Organization,

This 73rd session of the Uni ed Nations Ge eral Assembly is being held under the theme
Making the United Nations relevant to all people: global leadership and shared responsibilities
for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies". Therefore, the UN should give priority to the
pro otion a d safeguard of human needs, and strive to solve Humanity s global problems such
as those pertaining to security, the environment, economic inequalities and development in order
to ensure that global peace is reserved.

Our plea is that we should adopt a decentralized scheme for the global financial system, based
both on promotion of trade and regional economic integration systems, and the enhancement of

regional financial institutions in such ter s that allow for more sustainable economic
develop ent.

Your Majesties,
La ie and Gentlemen,

4

Throughout our history as an independent country, our collaboration with the UN has always
been permanent in that it has allowed us today to be engaged not only in the re-launch of our
economy, but also in the search for solutions for effective peace, democracy buildin and

development in Southern and Central African regions.

The Republic of Angola hereby expresses its willingness to continue supporting all efforts to
promote cooperation among the natio s of the whole world, consolidate peace and defense for
cooperation, trade and investment relations at the bilateral and multilateral levels.

Thank you ver much for your attention.

5

