Statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Armenia H.E. Nikol Pashinyan at the
General Debate of the

session of the

UN General Assembly
September 25, 2018

Distinguished President of the General Assembly,
Excellences,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

First of all, I would like to congratulate Her Excellency Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces upon
her election as the President of the 73^^ Session of the General Assembly and wish us fruitful
deliberations under her able leadership.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great honor to address you as a leader, who has recently become the Prime Minister of
Armenia as a result of people's revolution, which is now known as the Armenian Velvet
revolution. I would like to take a minute to share the story of our victory over the
authoritarian rule. The people of Armenia succeeded in unpredicted and unprecedented
revolution, without any violence, any victims or public disorder.

And it was not a coincidence. Our intention was to make a revolution of love and solidarity.
From the very beginning, we declared that we ruled out any violence. We declared that, even
if violence was used against us, we would not respond with violence. We declared that our
response would be with raised and open hands, smile and love.
When we started this political process, there were only dozens of us marching from the second
biggest city of Armenia, Gyumri to the capital Yerevan. When we reached Yerevan, and showed
our determination and devotion to the principle of non violence, our entire nation rose against
the ruling regime, in unity and solidarity.
And we won without a single shot and without any victims only through the peaceful
demonstrations. We succeeded against all expectations: even well-known experts and thinktanks were sceptical about our victory.
Against all odds, I was elected Prime Minister. I was elected in a Parliament, where I had

only four reliable votes, including my own. Yet it was possible. It happened, because people
were firm in their demand and the parliament, elected just a year ago, had no other choice
than to follow the people's will.
Today, that parliament continues to work, however it does not represent our people's will, as it
was not before and during the revolution. Why is it so? The answer is short. Because it was
elected through the elections with massive vote buying process and use of administrative
resources and oppression.

An important test for holding genuinely free and fair and competitive elections was the
Yerevan city council election which took place just before my departure to New York.

The fact that all the candidates for the first time since Armenia's independence congratulated
the winning candidate, speaks about the establishment of a completely new political culture in
Armenia.

In the same spirit We are now getting ready for snap parliamentary elections in Armenia. Free,
fair and transparent elections will become an irreversible reality in Armenia and will bring
strong and vibrant democratic institutions, the functioning system of checks and balances.

Protecting our citizens' rights and ensuring freedom of speech, expression and assembly is very
high on our government's agenda. From now on, there will be no possibility to manipulate the
electoral process and undermine the trust of citizens.

I would also like to stress that the current situation in Armenia is not just a change of a
government or a ruling party. It is an establishment of a new political and governance system,
which we name people's direct rule and people's direct governance.

In order to institutionalize this system we intend to guarantee expression of the people's will
not only through elections, but also through local and national referenda, to engage our people
into the decision-making process. Having been a political prisoner myself, I do understand
how significant it is to be able to speak out and decide your own future.

Having assumed the responsibility, our team has a clear vision and strong political will to
launch fundamental reforms aimed at eradicating corruption, creating transparent, accountable
and efficient governance, safeguarding human rights and the rule of law, ensuring
independence of judiciary and advancing economic growth through
a free and competitive business environment and a favorable atmosphere for investments.
Madam President,

Despite the radical transformations in the internal political life, our foreign policy agenda does
not have U-tums. The continuity of Armenia's foreign policy depicts Armenia as a predictable
and reliable partner. Our international commitments are not subject to revision.
Our position is clear - Armenia stands ready to have a constructive dialogue and cooperation
with all partners. However, we do not intend to develop our relations with one partner at the
expense of another. We underline the role of multilateralism on global and regional levels.
Armenia's cooperation under the umbrella of the United Nations is both comprehensive and
vibrant. Without entering into all the details, let me mention our contribution to the global
peace imder the auspices of the UN led and UN supported peace operations in an impressive
geographical scope that extends from Afghanistan to Lebanon, Kosovo and Mali.

This has a particular importance to our country: while itself facing serious security concerns, it
realizes that the security of one country is inseparably linked to that of all others, and that the
global peace requires concerted actions.
2

We have a truly global nation with hundreds of communities all around the world. Hence
comes the sensitivity of Armenia to the global threats that may put our fellow Armenians at
risk in different parts of the world.

The sizable Armenian community in Syria faces an existential threat from the ongoing crisis.
Armenia has tried to contribute through dispatching humanitarian assistance to most
vulnerable regions. We stand ready to enhance Armenia's humanitarian mission aimed at
meeting the most pressing needs of our community in Syria. As a nation that has passed
through the horrors of Genocide, Armenians have higher security consciousness when it comes
to our fellow people and are ready to do their utmost for their protection.

Madam President,

The peaceful resolution of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict continues to prevail our foreign
policy agenda. The status and security of the Republic of Artsakh is an absolute priority of the
Republic of Armenia in the negotiation process. Any attempt to resolve the conflict through
military means represents a direct threat to the regional security, democracy and human rights.

Armenia will continue its constructive engagement in the peaceful resolution of the conflict
within the format of the OSCE Minsk Group Co-Chairs, which has the only internationally
recognized mandate to deal with the conflict Azerbaijan should change its behavior of
disrespect towards the negotiations and abandon the idea of any military solution and
implement all the previous agreements.

Furthermore, if Azerbaijan is truly committed to the peace process it should start talking to the
main subject of this conflict - Nagorno-Karabakh.
Azerbaijan declares on every occasion that Karabakh should be a part of its territory. At the
same time it announces that it will not negotiate with Nagorno Karabakh.
The question is how Azerbaijan can make a claim over Nagorno-Karabakh without even
speaking to NK? Is that possible? This is possible only if Azerbaijani government wants the
territory and not the people.
Thus, it becomes obvious that the intention of Azerbaijani leadership is to cleanse Armenians
from Karabakh, like they did in Nakhijevan. This entitles Nagorno-Karabakh to make the
argument, that to be a part of Azerbaijan for Karabakh means to be totally exterminated.
Hence Karabakh must not be a part of Azerbaijan, unless one wants to trigger a new genocide
of Armenian people.
Summing up, let me reiterate: the conflict can and should be settled only through mutual
compromises by all sides, in an atmosphere conducive to peace and not war.
Last but not least; let me also express my satisfaction to the Secretary General of the United
Nations for his unwavering support to the efforts and approaches of the OSCE Minsk Group
Co-Chairmanship

Madam President,

The topic of our deliberations "Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global
leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies"
demonstrates our consistent approach to the Agenda 2030 and the sustainable development
goals. Indeed, the United Nations and its Development Agenda should be relevant and
accessible for all. No one should be left behind as we keep repeating in our collective efforts.

Earlier in July this year, Armenia presented its first Voluntary National Report on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals at the High Level Political Forum. This
important exercise coincided with the decisive political period determined by vibrant
democratic processes and the launch of a wide-range of reforms.

Armenia is committed to the creation and development of knowledge-based and innovative
platforms that will leverage the impact and accelerate the implementation of the development
agenda. In this regard, we recognize the indispensable role of the UN and its specialized
agencies as well as the role of the cooperation with other potential partners. As a newly-elected
member of the ECOSOC and a candidate for the Human Rights council for the term 2020-22
Armenia will do its utmost to contribute to the realization of Sustainable Development Goals
and to protection and promotion of human right sand fundamental freedoms.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

2018 is the year when we will mark the 70^ anniversary of two of the most important human
rights documents - the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. Each of these documents has its own

history and each of them has become a cornerstone for the development of international law.
They served as a basis for Armenia to start the series of Global Forum Sessions against the
Crime of Genocide. This year it will be dedicated to the issues of genocide prevention through
education, culture and museums. I encourage you to bring your contribution to the work of the
Forum.

Ladies and Gentlemen, Mesdames et Monsieur

« Vivre ensemble » est le theme du 17®™® Sommet de I'Organisation Internationale de la

Francophonie qui va se tenir en octobre prochain a Erevan, Capitale armenienne, agee de
deux-mille-huit-cents ans. C'est un grand honneur et un privilege pour TArmenie de faire
partie de la grande famille francophone, de promouvoir la tolerance et le respect mutuel a
travers la cooperation dans le domaine de la culture, de I'education et de I'innovation. Je
reitere une nouvelle fois nos invitations au Sommet de la Francophonie avec plusieurs
manifestations prevues dans le meme cadre.
Thank you.

