Australian Mission to the United Nations E-maii austraiia@un.int
150 East 42nd Street, New York NY 10017-5612 Ph 212 - 351 6600 Fax 212 - 351 6610 www.australia-unsc.gov.;

UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Friday 28 September 2018

General Debate of the 73rd Session of the United
Nations General Assembly
Statement by Senator The Hon Marise Payne
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia

(Check against delivery)

Mr President
We are all proud members of this venerable institution.

If this place, and our membership of it, stand for anything, then we stand
for an international order based on rules and cooperation.

This principle guides our actions, our dealings with each other, and our
treatment of collective challenges as they arise before us.

Australia recognises the reality of a world in which the power of great
states shapes the international system in which we seek to advance our
national interests. That is the grain with which we all work.

!
;

Equally, we hold true to this simple proposition - we will be safer and more
prosperous in a world where global differences are managed, and global
challenges met, by agreed rules rather than by the exercise of power alone.
¦

Strong global cooperation sets a tone, and sets in place rules and norms, for
constructive diplomacy in every region of the world.

This is true even in a period of rapid and accelerating change, and it is true
even in a period of rising nationalism and geo-political competition.

None of our most urgent global challenges can be solved by countries
acting alone. Solutions begin with collaboration.

In Australia s 2017 Foreign Policy White Paper, we set out an analysis of the
trends that are shaping the world. Most importantly, we set out our policy
response.

In a more competitive and contested era, Australia is taking responsibility
for our own security and prosperity. At home, we are investing in our
national resilience and strength, ensuring our economy is strong and
Australians are safe. We are sovereign and independent.

In our region - the Indo-Pacific - we seek a neighbourhood in which the
rights of all states are respected and adherence to rules delivers lasting
peace.

2

Internationally, we are committed to promoting and protecting the rules

and institutions that support stability and prosperity, and enable collective
action to meet global challenges.

Challenges

Mr President, at this time of change, challenge and opportunity, we
Member State representatives have the honour of preserving and
advancing international rules and order, to deliver on the expectations of
our people for a just, fair, and secure world.

One proof of the necessity of the United Nations is the hard fact that we
cannot with all confidence rid the world of nuclear weapons today or this
year.

Given this reality, we must redouble our efforts to prevent nuclear
proliferation, and to build the international trust and confidence necessary
to move towards a world free of nuclear weapons.

Our peoples expect us to continue to work towards verifiable nuclear
disarmament with sound compliance, safeguards and enforcement
regimes.

Overwhelmingly, our peoples expect us to prevent further proliferation of
nuclear weapons. To do this, we must continue to build on the progress we
have made through the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.

3

For this reason, Australia supports the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
on Iran s nuclear program, as long as Iran abides by its commitments. It is in
our collective interests that controls on Iran's nuclear programme remain in
place.

And for this reason, the world observes the negotiations between the
United States and North Korea, pursuing complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearisation of the Peninsula, in accordance with UN
Resolutions. Australia will also continue to fully implement our obligations
under the United Nations Security Council and maintain our own
autonomous sanctions while awaiting progress towards denuclearisation.
Further, we ha e most recently witnessed a new pattern of indiscriminate
slaughter through the use of chemical weapons, including the
weaponisation of toxic industrial chemicals such as chlorine. We have
collectively agreed that the use of chemical weapons anytime, anywhere,
and under any circumstances is unjustifiable and unacceptable.

As Member States, we must defend our long-standing prohibition on the
use of chemical weapons, and abide by our collective right and resolve to

investigate allegations, and to verify this prohibition. Australia joins those
calling for Syria to cease the use of chemicals as weapons. Australia also
continues to urge Russia, and all nations, to reinforce the prohibition on the
use of chemical weapons anywhere.

4

Mr President, Australia like the United Nations is committed to improving
humanitarian ass stance in fragile settings. I commend the Secretary

General for establishing the United for Gender Parity initiative, and for
declaring zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse.

Australia is also a robust and strong contributor to the UN s Women Peace
and Security agenda, first set out in UN Security Council Resolution 1325.

Australia was one of the first Member States to draw up a National Action
Plan on Women Peace and Security, and we are continuing work on our
next five year National Action Plan.

Examples of our work on this issue include a benchmark of a minimum of

15 per cent of female military members deployed on Australian
peacekeeping mission teams, which I was proud to support and to work to
see grow over the past three years in my previous role as Australia's
Minister for Defence. Australia also has active training programs on Women
Peace and Security in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Philippines, where our
military is assisting partner forces to deal with counter-terrorism and
counter-insurgency challenges.

Australia firmly believes that it is only through the inclusion of women in all
aspects of peace and security initiatives, including negotiations, the design
of peace processes, and the management and enforcement of peace
programs, that lasting and resilient security can be achie ed.

5

Mr President, many here will remember my predecessor and friend Julie

Bishop s determined and sustained work pursuing accountability for the
downing of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17. Australia remains resolutely
committed to this objective, and we will continue working with our Joint
Investigation Team partners to pursue justice for the victims and their loved
ones.

In expecting other Member States to abide by international rules, we must
also subject ourselves to those same standards and expectations.

Australia and Timor-Leste signed a new Maritime Boundaries Treaty here in
New York on 6 March this year.

The Treaty was the successful result of the first-ever compulsory

conciliation initiated under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea.

The Treaty underscores Australia's commitment to international law, and is
testament to the way in which international law, in particular the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea, enables countries to resolve disputes

peacefully and properly, abiding by the rules.

The conciliation process created the space for compromise and negotiation
on what I acknowledge was a previously intractable disagreement, and
ultimately strengthened bilateral relations.

6

Mr President, when Member States work together to uphold international

law and the institutions that support it, the benefits accrue to all alike: the
powerful and the weak, the large and the small.

This is a long-standing principle we share, regardless of our culture,
language, religion or political system: we are all equal before the law.

Our region
Mr President, Australia particularly welcomes the active engagement of the
UN in our region, the Indo-Pacific. It is a youthful and dynamic region
which has experienced an economic transformation in recent decades that
is unprecedented in human history.

The region s rising prosperity has been built on a foundation of stability.

Australia is absolutely committed to ensuring that the fundamental
principles which have enabled the region's success are maintained.

We are committed to a region in which the rights of all states are
respected. A region characterised by respect for international law and
other norms, and where disputes are resolved peacefully. And a region in
which open markets facilitate the free flow of trade, capital and ideas.

To achieve these outcomes Australia is strengthening our Indo-Pacific
bilateral relations, because they are among our most important in their

7

own right and because strong bilateral relations help support our regional
goals.

Our aid program is an important mechanism through which we support the
aspirations of our neighbours. It is predominately and unashamedly
focused on the Indo-Pacific region and geared to expand opportunities for
people, business and communities to promote economic growth and
further reduce regional poverty.

We work in sectors that drive economic growth and human development,
including aid for trade, infrastructure, education and health, and
empowering women and girls. And we work in ways that are most

effective, including with UN Resident Coordinators, and through the
region s political, security and economic architecture.

ASEAN
Mr President, ASEAN sits at the heart of the region. It is the collective voice
of Southeast Asia. A vital piece of that regional architecture.

There are good reasons why Australia is ASEAN's longest standing dialogue
partner. We are both committed to driving continued strong regional
economic growth and we share optimism for the future. At the same-time
we share a conviction to tackle head on the security challenges of our
region, including the fight against terrorism.

8

As the convener for more than 50 years of the Indo-Pacific s most
important diplomatic architecture, particularly the East Asia Summit,

ASEAN plays a vital role in the security, stability and prosperity of the IndoPacific.

Australia s interests are well served by ASEAN and our commitment to its
continued effectiveness and success is stronger than ever.

This commitment was there for all to see at an ASEAN-Australia Special
Summit, held in Sydney in March this year. The Summit marked a new era

in the Strategic Partnership between ASEAN and Australia. Leaders issued
the Sydney Declaration, which comprehensively sets out ASEAN and
Australia s shared commitment to work together towards a more secure
and prosperous region.

APEC
In other key pieces of regional architecture, the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation forum, or APEC, seeks to build upon the growing
interdependence of the Asia-Pacific's 21 member economies. The APEC
meeting in Papua New Guinea in November will be an important further
opportunity to foster cooperation and economic activity across borders, to

the mutual benefit of all.

I commend Papua New Guinea on the work it has done to host APEC 2018,
and look forward in particular to a successful Leaders' Week later this year.

9

I also commend the Republic of Nauru for its successful hosting of the 49th
Pacific Islands Forum in the first week of September. With the theme of
Building a strong Pacific: our islands, our people, our will , the member
states, associate members, observers and dialogue partners of the Pacific
Islands Forum Secretariat continued the long tradition of amity,
consultation, partnership and policy development on diverse matters of
climate change, economic reform, transport and trade.

Australia is committed to working with member states, and UN Resident
Coordinators, to strengthen resilience to climate change and natural
disasters in the Pacific. In all of this, the UN Development Program is a vital
partner.

Australia recognises that Pacific island countries are particularly vulnerable

to the effects of climate change and disaster, and that this is a leading
priority for the region. The Pacific Islands Forum Boe Declaration, released
last month at the meeting by member states, takes a comtemporary view
of security inclusive of human and environmental security and emphasises
the importance of regional cooperation and collaboration in building
resilience to disasters and climate change.

Mr President, Australia seeks a region that promotes accountability and
respects international law for the benefit of all nations.

In 2018 we joined the Fluman Rights Council for the first time.

10

Australia has been a strong supporter of the Independent International
Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, and we have been deeply disturbed by
its findings.

We are working with Myanmar and with ASEAN and regional partners to
find long-term solutions to this crisis, including with Indonesia as co-chairs
of the Bali Process and through joint humanitarian efforts in Cox s Bazar.

Australia will continue to work with the Myanmar Government and the
international community towards a long-term and durable resolution of the
nation's complex problems.

After 50 years of isolation and instability, Myanmar is at critical stage in its
democratic and economic transition, and it is in all our interests to ensure it
succeeds.

Let us honour the late Secretary-General Kofi Annan by renewing our

efforts to see fully and genuinely implemented the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, which he led.

Conclusion
Mr President, international institutions, and the United Nations in
particular, help us to adapt collectively as our world changes around us. But
as the Secretary General noted when he opened the General Assembly
trust in global governance is also fragile, as 21st-century challenges
outpace 20th-century institutions and mindsets .

11

This is why Australia supports the Secretary General s work to reform the
UN.

We need to work together to keep pace with the needs and aspirations of
the people we serve.

But to remain fit for our times, the United Nations must remain true to the
founding principles, the universal rights and obligations, we agreed upon
when we first came together as Member States.

Chief among these is the sovereign equality of all states.

Member States must re-dedicate themselves to the aspirations of the
founders of the United Nations, and take to heart the Charter, so that our
world is a more just, fair and secure place to live.

END

12

