73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly

Address

by
Sheikh Hasina
Hon ble Prime Minister
Government of the People s Republic of Bangladesh

The United Nations
New York

27 September 2018

Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim
Madam President,
As-Salamu Alaikum and good evening.

Let me congratulate you on your election as the fourth female President of the UN
General Assembly during its 73 years history. I assure you of my delegation’s full
support in upholding your commitment to the UN.
I also felicitate Mr. Antonio Guterres, UN Secretary General for his firm and
courageous leadership in promoting global peace, security and sustainable
development.
Madam President,
The theme you have chosen for this year’s session brings back some personal
memories for me. Forty-four years ago, my father, the Father of the Nation

Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman stood on this podium and said, / quote,
Peace is an imperative for the survival of humanity. It represents the deepest
aspirations of men and women throughout the world... The United Nations

remains as the centre of hope for the future of the people in this world of sadness,
misery and conflict. Unquote
Madam President,

My father Bangab ndhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman devoted his life for the socio¬
economic development of the people of Bangladesh. He had done so at a time
when 90% of the population lived below the poverty line. Following 24 years of
stmggle culminating in the victory of our Liberation War, Bangladesh gained
Independence under his leadership in 1971. During this long period of struggle, he
spent his time in the prison for almost 14 years. There were plots to assassinate
him again and again.

2

Following the Independence, Bangabandhu directed his strength to rebuild a warravaged country with a ruined economy. The people got back a sense of relief.
Bangladesh set on its journey ahead as an LDC. Yet, what a misfortune for our

people! Bangabandhu could lead the country only for three years and a half. He
was brutally gunned down by assassins on 15 August 1975. Along with him, 18
members of my family - among them my mother Begum Fazilatunnesa, three
brothers, the youngest only ten years of age, and two newly-wed sisters-in-law

were also killed. My sister Sheikh Rehana and I happened to be abroad at the time
and survived the mayhem. But, we were barred from getting back to the country.

The military dictator who grabbed power at the time promulgated an Indemnity
Ordinance and blocked the possibility for bringing the killers to justice. We were
denied the right to seek justice for the gruesome murders.
Madam President,
I can feel the pain and suffering of countless people around the world, persecuted

and expelled from their homes like the Rohingya. It is impossible to build peaceful,
just and sustainable societies by ignoring such situations. The Myanmar situation
repeatedly reminds us of the genocide committed by the Pakistan occupation forces
against our people in 1971. During the nine months of our Liberation War, the
Pakistanis had killed three million innocent Bengalis. Two hundred thousand
women had to suffer heinous torture and abuse. Ten million people had to flee their
homes and take refuge in India. My father was arrested and taken to Pakistan. I
was also taken prisoner along with my mother, two younger brothers and a sister. I

was expecting my first child at the time. He was bom in captivity. We had to spend
our days in a damp unhealthy environment.

We are appalled by what we have seen in UN Reports about atrocities against the
Rohingya who have now taken shelter in Bangladesh, which are tantamount to
genocide and crimes against humanity. We expect the inte ational community,

particularly the UN, to give due importance to the atrocities and injustice suffered
by the Rohingya population in Myanmar.

3

Madam President,

As a fellow human, we can neither ignore nor remain silent about the plight of the
Rohingya. When my father and family members had been killed, I was not allowed
to return home for six years. My sister and I were compelled to live abroad as

refugees. I can feel the misery of losing one s loved ones and of living in a
different land as a refugee.
I, therefore, presented a five-point proposal at the UN General Assembly last year

with a view to finding a durable and peaceful solution to the sufferings of the
forcibly displaced and hapless Rohingya. We are disappointed that despite our
earnest efforts we have not been able to begin Rohingya repatriation in a
permanent and sustainable manner.
Myanmar is one of our neighbours. From the outset, we have been trying to find a

peaceful solution to the Rohingya crisis through bilateral consultations. So far,
three bilateral arrangements have been concluded between Bangladesh and
Myanmar for Rohingya repatriation. Despite their verbal commitment to take back
the Rohingya, in reality the Myanmar authorities are yet to accept them back.
The 1.1 million Rohingya hosted in Bangladesh are living in an uncertain situation.
To the best of our ability, we have made arrangements for their food, clothing,
healthcare, child-care and security. Many countries and organizations including the

UN, the Commonwealth, and the QIC have shown solidarity with the Rohingya
and extended support and assistance for them. I extend my appreciation and thanks
to the international community.

So long the Rohingya are not able to return home, they should, as a temporary
arrangement, be able to live in a good and healthy condition. With this in mind, we
have started working on a new housing facility for them with all arrangements for
their education, health care and other needs. I call upon international organizations

to join hands with us in this initiative. I also seek their assistance to help relocate

the Rohingya to the facility.

4

The Rohingya crisis has had its origin in Myanmar. As such, its solution has to be
found in Myanmar. We also wish to see immediate and effective implementation
of the agreement concluded between Myanmar and the UN. We want an early,

peaceful solution to the Rohingya crisis.
Madam President,

In last 30 years, Bangladesh has made its contribution to international peace by
deploying over 158,000 peacekeepers in 54 missions. 145 peacekeepers from
Bangladesh have made their supreme sacrifice in the line of duty. Currently, more

than 7,000 peacekeepers including 144 women are deployed in ten different
missions. Our peacekeepers have been acclaimed for their professionalism,
courage and success. We pledged 23 contingents under the Peacekeeping

Capability Readiness System .
As the original proponent, Bangladesh expected to see a more robust and human

rights centric Global Compact on Safe, Regular and Orderly Migration. In the
contemporary global context, the Migration Compact should be considered a
positive step and should serve as a living document for protecting the rights of
migrants.

Bangladesh stands firm against terrorism and all organized crimes. We shall not
allow our territory to be used for any terrorist acts against or any activity
detrimental to the interest of our neighbours. Our zero tolerance policy in
countering terrorism will continue undiminished. Our ‘whole of society’ approach
has served us well in preventing violent extremism, human trafficking and flow of

illicit drugs. Bangladesh has aligned itself with the Global Call to Action on the
World Drug Problem mooted by the United States.
Madam President,
Since 2009, we have been implementing inclusive and people-centric development

policies. On our way to realizing Shonar Bangla as envisioned by our Father of the
Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, we remain committed to fulfilling
our people’s aspirations.
5

The World Bank recognized Bangladesh as a middle-income country in 2015.
Bangladesh is the 43rd largest economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP. Our

per capita income has increased from US$ 543 in 2006 to US$ 1,752 in 2018. We
have achieved the average GDP growth rate of 7.86%. Inflation has decreased by
5.4%. Poverty rate has dropped from 41.5% in 2006 to 21.4% in 2018. During the
same period, extreme poverty has decreased from 24% to 11.3%.

Our forex reserve was USD 7.5 billion in 2008-09 fiscal year. In 2018, it grew up
to USD 32.2 billion. Public investment was at 4.3% of GDP in 2009. It rose to
8.2% in 2018.
Power generation capacity has gone up to 20,000 megawatts from 3000 megawatts
in 2009. We are building coal-based super-critical power generation plants to
ensure sustainable power supply. In remote areas without transmission lines, power

supply is being ensured with the help of 5.5 million solar panels. 90% of our
population has come under electricity coverage. With the launch of the work on the
Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant, we have moved a step ahead in the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.

Bangladesh is now recognized as a global development model. We have
commenced our journey from being an LDC to the status of a developing country.

The pathway for graduation is inextricably linked with our SDG implementation
strategy, which is integrated in our Seventh Five Year Plan. We remain fully
committed to implementing the SDGs.
In the backdrop of our current economic growth, there are now immense and large-

scale business opportunities in Bangladesh. Foreign investors are being offered
various financial incentives like tax holiday, avoidance of double taxation and
exemption of duties. We are setting up 100 Special Economic Zones that would
help create 10 million job opportunities in Bangladesh.

6

Madam President,
To follow up on my role as a member, we remain co mitted to implement the

outcome of the High-level Panel on Water, formed under the joint initiative of the
UN Secretary General and the World Bank President. I urge world leaders to take
urgent actions on proper appraisal, management and investment in water. We shall
be held responsible to our future generations if we fail to do so.
My government remains committed to ensuring safe drinking water and sanitation

for all through achieving SDG 6. As of now, 99% of our people have access to
sanitation and 88% to safe drinking water.
Madam President,
Under our social safety-net programmes, 6.5 million elderly men and women,

widows, destitute women and persons with disabilities are getting regular
allowances.

Since 2010, students are receiving free textbooks from pre-primary to secondary

levels in school. 354.92 million books have been distributed among 43.76 million
students this year. Vision impaired students are receiving braile books. Children
from ethnic minorities are being given books in their mother languages.
Around 20.03 million students from primary to graduate level are getting stipends.
Stipend money for 14 million students is sent directly to their mothers through
mobile phones. We have ensured 100% enrollment at the primary level. Literacy

rate has increased from 45% to 72.9% in the last nine and half years.
Our home-grown, innovative socio-economic development models have gained
widely popular acceptance. Micro-savings have been introduced for rural,

marginalized communities through the One House, One Farm (Ekti Bari, Ekti
Khamar) project. The amount saved by beneficiaries on their individual accounts is
equaled in deposit by the government. The ‘Shelter Project (Ashrayon) is being
implemented wi h the aim of having no homeless person in Bangladesh. We are
working towards reaching urban facilities to every one of our villages.

7

Madam President,
Women s empowerment and participation ave been a major factor in
Bangladesh’s outstanding development. We have promoted women’s

empowerment through enhancing their education opportunities and facilitating
their political and economic emancipation.

We have created opportunities for girls to pursue their education free of cost till
twelfth grade in public educational institutions. At secondary level, the ratio of
girls and boys is 53:47. In early 2009, it was 35:65.
Bangladesh is perhaps the world’s only country, where in its National Parliament,
the Speaker, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader of the House, and the
Leader of the Opposition are all women. In the present Parliament, there are 72
elected female members. 33% seats are earmarked for women in local government
bodies in order to promote women’s political empowerment at the grassroots.

Around 20 million women are employed in agriculture, service and industrial
sectors. Women constitute 80% of 4.5 million workers engaged in the largest
export ea ing garments sector. Women entrepreneurs are offered collateral free

bank loans with 5% service charge. 10% of Small Entrepreneurs’ Fund and 10% of
industrial plots are earmarked for women entrepreneurs.
Madam President,

Bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries in the world. More than
160 million people now live in a land area of only 147,570 square km. Despite our
resource constraints, we have made significant strides across a range of social
indices.

The maternal mortality rate has decreased to 170 per 1000 and child mortality rate
under the age of five has gone down to 28 per thousand. Life expectancy has
increased to 72 years from 64 in 2009.
In the last fiscal year, we spent 5.9% of our national budget in the public health
sector. This year, investment in health has been increased by 17%. With around

18,000 community health clinics and Union Health Centres operating, health care
8

been reached to our people s doorsteps. 30 different types of medicines are being
distributed free of cost. Tuberculosis prevention and control efforts have been

intensified to reach the 2030 SDG target. As a result, TB related deaths have
reduced by 19% in the last two years.
Madam President,

Bangladesh has been playing a pioneering role in raising awareness about the
needs of children affected by autism and other neuro-developmental disorders. In

order to further consolidate our efforts in this regard, a specialized cell is being
created in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. A National Steering
Committee and a National Advisory Committee have already been set up. Saima
Hossain Wazed, Chairperson of the Advisory Committee and a member of the
World Health Organisation’s (WHO) expert advisory panel on mental health, has
been named a Goodwill Ambassador on this issue for South Asia.
Madam President,

We welcome the formation of the Secretary General’s High-level Panel on Digital
Cooperation. The underlying premise of our vision for a "Digital Bangladesh" is to
promote people’s well-being. Widespread introduction of Inte et-based public

service delivery has led to growth in job creation at the grass root level. The idea of
a Digital Bangladesh has become real.
We have made our foray into the world of space technology by launching our own
satellite, Bangabandhu I, being the 57th country in the world to have done so. It

was in fact a dream of our Father of the Nation that we would one day reach the
outer space. The launching of this satellite helped us realize the aspiration he had
instilled in us by setting up the first satellite ground-station of the country on 14
June 1975.
Madam President,
Bangladesh is among the 10 most climate vulnerable countries in the world. Its
topography coupled with high density of population has made the country
particularly exposed to climate change risks.
9

Bangladesh remains com itted to implement the Paris Agreement. We are

spendi g over 1% of our GDP in addressing climate change impacts; we are also
promoting climate-resilient agriculture. Initiatives have been taken to increase tree

coverage from 22% to 24% in the next five years. A project worth 50 million US
dollar is being implemented for the conservation of the Sundarbans, the world s
largest mangrove forest and a UNESCO world heritage site.
We have integrated our development programmes and our efforts to build capacity
for combating climate change into a mega project titled Delta Plan 2100. It is a
water-centric, multi-sectoral, techno-economic plan with a long-term time frame. It

has been developed in consideration of the local geo-morphology and of global
climate change impact. Bangladesh is the only country in the world that has
adopted such a long-term development plan spanning 82 years.
Madam President,

We are shocked by the continued violation of the rights of the brotherly people of
Palestine. This must come to an end. As the Chair of the QIC Council of Foreign
Ministers, we shall continue to work with the international community for
resolution of the Palestine question.

Madam President,
There are three elements that play the most critical part in advancing human
civilization: Peace, humanity and development. For the well-being of human
societies, we must continue to strive for humanity. Our main objective must be to

serve the people nd ensure their well-being. It is humanity and goodwill that
would take us forward on the pathway to sustainable development.

In a world faced with myriad of challenges, our common interest, shared
responsibility and sustainable partnership would be our best bet for preserving the
human civilization.

10

Madam President,

All my life, I have been working selflessly to make a dif erence in the lives of my
people. In the last nine years and a half, Bangladesh has achieved remarkable
success in different socio-economic sectors. That Bangladesh the world knew as

the land plagued by disasters, floods, droughts and hunger has done wonders in
maintaining inte ational peace, managing disasters, empowering women and

consolidating development gains. Bangladesh has now surpassed its neighbours in
South Asia on a number of indicators.

But, our journey has not reached its end. Our journey will continue till the day we
can build a Bangladesh free of hunger, poverty, illiteracy and exploitation - the

Shonar Bangladesh of our Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman.

I thank you.

Khoda Hafez
Joy Bangla, Joy Bangabandhu
May Bangladesh Live-forever

