Permanent Mission

of Barbados to

the United Nations
STATEMENT BY
HON. MIA AMOR MOTTLEY, Q.C. M.P.

PRIME MINISTER OF BARBADOS
TO THE

GENERAL DEBATE

OF THE

73rd SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

28 SEPTEMBER, 2018

United Nations General Assembly
New York

please check against deliv ry

Madam President,
Let me begin by congratulating you on your election and in
particular, for being only the fourth woman in the 73 year history of

this organization, to hold the high honour of being elevated to the
position of President of the United Nations General Assembly,
! lso take this opportunity to express my delega ion s thanks to
your redeces or, His Excellency, Wir, Miroslav Lajcak for the way in
which he conducted the work of tire Genera! Assembly during the
72n Session and to wish him well.

Permit me, adam President to observe that this United Nations
must show leadership in recognizing the talents and contributions
of women to human civilization and progress. Women have value

and give much, whether they labour over smoking wood fires;
whether generations of women are tra ped in poverty because of a

lack of opportunity, equality and respect; whether they lead
countries; whether they stay at home to care for families; or whether
they come to the UN, as you have, to preside over outcome
documents, robust negotiations, bracketed paragraphs, reform

processes and global policy platforms, in the name of creating for
all people everywhere, a life of dignity. Madam President, as a female
leader, I cannot help but observe that the face of poverty all over the
world, is predominantly fe ale and I commend you on your seven

priority areas one of which is i proving the quality of life of women
and girls.

Madam President,
When Barbados first Prime Minister, the Right Excellent, Errol
Walton Barrow, addressed this august assembly for the first time
i

after Independence, just over 50 years ago, he made the
pronouncement that in its international relationships Barbados
would be friends of all and satellites of none. That assertion

became the underpinning philosophy that has guided how Barbados
conducted itself on the world stage. The challenge now, however, is
that our country s core principles and values have remained
constant, but the world in which we live has changed. It has become
increasingly hostile. Transactions have become more important
than relationships. Indeed, the mighty manoeuvre to make minions
of the majority.

I entered public life almost three decades ago. At that time, I never
believed that as Barbados entered the second fifty years of our

independence we would again be forced to fight battles that
predated Independence. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
was forged out of the rejection of the dominance of commercialism
over the citizen; out of social and economic alienation; out of two
world wars and an atomic bomb and the world’s recognition that the
human family must unite to ensure that we never again stand on the
precipice of annihilation.

Madam Chairman, the Government which I have the honour to lead,
was voted into office just over three months ago, in the midst of the
most dire economic crisis Barbados has ever faced. The tremendous

challenge and responsibility now is to define a new trajectory for my
country. We must reinforce our core values as a people while

remaining relevant and responsive in a rapidly evolving and often
hostile world, which threatens the viability of small vulnerable states
such as my own. Peace and social stability can only exist when all
2

the world s citizens are given the opportunity and space to thrive.
Trade and business flourish when societies develop and are able to
buy each other s goods and services. This yields more beneficial

results than the building of walls, the tightening of borders and the
closing of ports to refugees and migrants. As in the past, a fair
opportunity is all my country and citizens seek.

The multilateral system acknowledges and fosters mutual respect
and dignity for all members of the human family, whether they are
mighty or meek. It accords to all the right to li e in societies that are
stable, peaceful, equitable and sustainable. The conditions for such
societies are created not by fine words, but by fair actions, not by
flowery rhetoric, but by resolute determination to work for the good
of all the peoples of the world.

Hence adam President, it is in this forum that SIDS and other
vulnerable countries must know that their sovereignty is to be
respected and advanced and that the meek have no less a right to

exist in dignity, than do the mighty. Platforms such Rio and Rio+20,
the Barbados Plan of Action, the Mauritius Strategy of
Implementation, the SAMOA Pathway, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as founded on the SDGs, the Paris

Agreement and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for
Development, the reform of the Security Council and of the UN itself,
must provide the architecture for transformation for the people who
most need to be lifted out of overty and moved out of the way of
serious threats to their survival and sustainability.

3

Today s leaders are again fighting battles for non-interference,
respect, recognition and rights that many of us thought had long
been won by a previous generation. Economic colonisation is

replacing physical colonization. A creeping trend against
multilateralism threatens to undermine, and perhaps even reverse,

the effort and achievement of more than 70 years of collectivism.
This should concern us all.

Evidence and history clearly show that this organisation is at its
strongest when it unites in pursuit of great causes and the wellbeing
of the entire human family; when it has worked for peace, to ensure
that bombs and bullets do not cut down our boys before they
become men; that our girls have access to education; our wo en do

not die in childbirth; that all people have the opportunity for decent
work and that irrespective of the country in which they are born, our
children can have a reasonable life expectancy. People take the work
and achievements of the United Nations for granted because they
are rarely reminded that the peace, prosperity, security and stability

enjoyed by the majority of the world’s citizens come through the
collectivism of the UN’s 193 member-states.

The hard lessons of history demonstrate that we can only survive in
a world based on a transparent rules-based system; that respects

the dignity of citizens; that protects the sovereignty of states to chart
their own destiny; that engenders inclusion over alienation; and
fairness over favouritism. These are the very essence of

multilateralism. The tensions of a world torn by isms and schisms ,
by religious intolerance, by xenophobia and fear, by bullying and
greed, cannot lead to prosperity and stability, neither for the mighty
4

nor for the meek. When this United Nations was founded, our leaders
passed to us a baton. It was a vision of hope for humanity.

Let us ask ourselves, can we truly afford to drop the baton in the
race of development? Or in the pursuit of the SDGs? Or because of
a failure to stand in unison and speak truth to power , in order to
defend the gains made by generations now gone?

Madam President, I speak in this Assembly at a time when the
confluence of circumstances on our social, economic and

environmental landscapes are so severely threatened that
Caribbean civilization, as we know it, is at risk. Let me share with you
the reality and challenges confronting the leaders of small,
vulnerable island states.
¦ Countries of our region, such as Guyana and Belize, face

border disputes and in the case of Cuba, a decades-long
embargo keeps their people disadvantaged and national
progress constrained. These are matters of serious concern for

Barbados. Should we take it as a given that some countries can

always determine the stability of others? Why do you think that
the figures of history who garner the most respect are the
humanitarians - Ghandi, Martin Luther King, andela, Kofi
Annan?

¦ Less than 48 hours ago, at the One Planet Summit I saw a map
which has since haunted me. The map showed a number of

dangerous tipping points that if reached, will result in
devastation to the peoples of the Arctic, Antarctic and Coral

5

Reef regions of our world. An increase in mean temperatures

of two degrees, will wipe out the islands of the coral reefs and
their peoples who are already contending with the increased
frequency and ferocity of hurricane systems. Just like our
ancestors, we are being shown that we are marginal at best and
irrelevant at worst. If our coral reefs are estroyed and islands

are inundated by sea level rise, where are we to go?

¦ In my region and my country, our path to economic growth is

being choked off unilaterally by institutions in which we are not
allowed to advocate for ourselves and from which others
dictate our fate. Barbados, the Caribbean and other SIDS have
had to confront the reality that our percentage in trade of goods
and services is miniscule, but we are bound by the same rules
that apply to those who dominate and can distort global trade.
Small states like mine were shepherded out of agriculture and
told that services were the route we should use for
development. My country, for example, tried financial services
pursuant to double taxation treaties, utilizing due diligence,
operating a clean jurisdiction that is not a tax haven and
complying with OECD requirements. Now we are being told our
tax practices are harmful and unfair competition to those who
still enjoy the bulk of the revenues in global trade and services.
Where are we to turn?

¦ These twin threats to which I just referred are conjoined with
our high debt to GDP ratios, now likely to increase because of
derisking. The unilateral cessation of correspondent banking
relationships reduces access to capital and our capacity to
6

engage in trade and conduct business in the international
market place, Derisking jeopardises our capacity to remain
properly integrated into the global financial, trade and
economic systems. Is there no door to development that our

people can legitimately enter?

¦ Bad though all of this is, there is still more, Madam President.
Our classification as middle income countries denies us the
concessionary financing which we so desperately need to help
to build capacity and resilience. Moreover Madam President,

the designation of middle income status of the islands of the
Caribbean, based solely on GDP per capita inco e, yet
ignoring vulnerabilities and the absence of resilience, really
only serves to misconstrue wellbeing as entrenched and
irreversible. That is a false perception when set against our
experience, which demonstrates that the veneer of wellbeing is
easily stripped away by sea swells, strong winds or rising
rivers across the island chain. This has been repeatedly proven
in every decade by Hurricanes such as Gilbert, Katrina, and
more recently Ivan, Irma and Maria, which robbed several

islands of years of work and effort, over 200% of GDP and set
back, by decades, their dreams of develop ent. Even as I
speak, Madam Chairman, Tropical Storm Kirk is churning past
my country and heading across the islands of the Eastern
Caribbean. Even though the eye passed north of Barbados, and
even though its wind speeds have, technically, not merited the
categorization of hurricane, it has rained for 12 hours straight
over the island and caused severe flooding and property and
infrastructural damage across large sections of the country. I
7

am therefore cutting short my official duties abroad and
returning home this evening. But I ask - Would vulnerability not
be a better measure of status and sustainability than GDP?

¦ Our shrinking economic and development space have
contracted even further as result of a reduction in Official
Development Assistance and Foreign Direct Investment. Yet,
we remain highly vulnerable with limited size, capacity. In these
circumstances, are we not deserving of the policy space and
opportunity to build social, economic and environmental
resilience?

¦ The new language of the development system encourages us
to pursue innovative financing. This connotes the tightening
of tax loopholes, strengthening collection, the elimination of
corruption and the widening of the net in order to ensure the
taxes that are owed actually reach Government s coffers. The

truth is, that the national tax bases of SIDS are low yield
because of the small size of our populations and the
microbusinesses which comprise our indigenous business
sectors. Hence, the utilisation of private-public partnerships or
PPPs which are also being advocated, have low returns on
investment and are therefore unattractive for the international
private sector. The Financing for Develo ment Agenda does

not include any specific provision for SIDS that is predicated
on our realities and vulnerabilities. Where then is the revenue
to finance development to come from?

8

Madam President,
Having voiced my concerns, let me now share my commitments.

Barbados is committed to multilateralism. In the absence of a rules
based system, the law of the jungle dominates. It becomes the meek
versus the mighty. For us the commitment to multilateralism is not
an academic exercise. It is critical to our existence and our being and

that, fundamentally, is the only way in which we are not unequally
yoked. It is the only way in which we have choice and by extension,
freedom to exist.

We are committed to the establishment within the multilateral
system of a mechanism for development financing which recognises
the vulnerabilities of SIDS and uses their maritime space, which is
an effective carbon sink and is significantly larger than their
terrestrial space, as the basis for funding. In the case of Barbados,
our maritime space is 400 times larger than our terrestrial space.

We are committed to pursuing a Green Economy and Blue Economy.
To this end, my Government has established a single Ministry with
responsibility for Maritime Affairs and the Blue Economy. In 2007,
Barbados was the first government in the Americas to establish a

National Green Economy Policy which we will fully operationalise
and transition Barbados to a climate resilient society and economy
powered by renewable energy.

We are committed to finding and maximising legitimate policy space
to pay our way in the world and to ensure our citizens dignity and a

better quality of life.

9

We are committed to creating a prosperous, entrepreneurial society
with fair opportunity for our citizens in which they can live free from
the scourge of the NCDs, drugs and gun violence.

We are committed to building a strong, exceptional Barbados brand

within the global family of nations.

I speak for humanity and in defence of Caribbean civilization. I
cannot accept that we are dispensable.

So who among you is listening? Which of you is really hearing? Who
is prepared to stand in the breech, in defence of one world? Who are
prepared to raise their voices in support of those of us who have
been asked to remain mute and invisible, while the rest of the world
gets on with the business of development? As all previous
generations have been, our generation will be judged, not on nice
words or appropriate incantations, but on the effectiveness of our
actions.

Will we carry and hand over to future generations, the baton left us
by those who dreamed of a world of united nations or will we drop

it? I urge you today, to hold that baton tight as we run the
development course and until it is time to hand over.
We cannot and must not fail.

Madam President, I am much obliged to you.

10

