Please check against delivery
STATEMENT

by His Excellency Vladimir Makei
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Belarus

73''<' session of the UN General Assembly
General debate

New York, October 1®*, 2018
Mr. President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

We live In paradoxical times, when optimism and pessimism equally characterize our life.
Indeed, we have recently endorsed such momentous documents as the United Nations 2030

Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Climate Agreement.
Later this year, the international community is bound to give the "green light" to two more
instruments that inspire particular hopes for changing the situation in the world for the better. These are
the global compacts on refugees and on migrants.

The implementation of these singular initiatives is intended to transform human life on the globe
in a most drastic way, to make globalization both fair and a "win-win" phenomenon, as well as to
eradicate poverty and preserve the planet for future generations.

The search for answers to global challenges, the quest for ways to address common objectives
clearly points out the following - no country can solve them alone. Individual headway Is impossible
without collective progress.

That is why no matter how justified the criticism voiced against the United Nations is, we still
need the Organization as a unique platform for cooperation, as an efficient multilateral mechanism based

on the principles that guarantee equal and respectful attitude towards each and every country, its
priorities and needs.

What is above all required to assist States in implementing the ambitious goals stemming from
the 2030 Agenda are effective "UN country teams", which can furnish governments on their path to
sustainable development with result-oriented and rational support. That is exactly where we see the gist
of the UN development reform.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Expanding the reach of globalization and streamlining its management in ways that meet both
everyone's interest and common good remain a fundamental contemporary task. Yet, certain difficulties
can be seen there.

Globalization is accompanied by emerging geo-political and geo-econcmic fault-lines not just in
the regional context, but also on the global scale. A kind of a civiiizational trap is taking shape, in which
the demands for integration go hand in glove with the manifestations of fragmentation, protectionism and
even confrontation.

Located in the center of Europe, Belarus, on the one hand, is a member of the Eurasian economic

union, while on the other, it has an interest in pursuing intensive economic cooperation with the
European Union. "Squeezed" by the two geopolitical power centers, we fully feel the interplay between
geo-politics and geo-economics.

The conflict in Ukraine, the rising tension in the region, sanctions and counter-sanctions weigh
heavily on our country, if not often directly, then indirectly, in the form of substantial economic loses.
Belarus, as a middle-sized country with one of the most open economies in the world - because
we export up to 60-70 percent of our GDP - is heavily dependent on external markets and international
trade.

That is one of the reasons we consistently stand for building a fair, predictable and non-

discriminatory trade and economic architecture both In Europe and elsewhere, which would be aligned
with the interests of all countries.

We believe that it should be underpinned by multi-tier integration projects.
Owing to its geographical location, Belarus is particularly interested in closer cooperation between

the Eurasian Economic Union and the European Union. After all, our western border remains essentially
the only economic borderline on the huge space stretching from Lisbon to Vladivostok, and, in a longerterm perspective, reaching perhaps as far southward as Shanghai.

That is why Belarus has been very consistent In advocating the idea of "integration of
integrations" as the principle of cooperation oriented around a common search for optimal ways towards
unifying economic growth and sustainable development.

Attaining the Goals of the Sustainable Development Agenda, with its overriding promise to leave
no one behind, requires particular attention and international support to Middle-Income Countries.

It is precisely this group of countries that hosts five out of the worid's total seven billion peopie,
that wieids the greatest potential for economic growth, and that is indispensable when it comes to
ensuring global sustainability.

On the other hand, it is within this group where the three quarters of the world's poor reside. It is
the MICs that are most vulnerable to such factors as global economic fluctuations, consequences of
regional conflicts, natural and man-made catastrophes, climate upheavals, epidemics, which all combine
to threaten social and economic stability and widen inequality. Including at the regional and global levels.
It is, thus, unfair that progress in development is being gauged exclusively on the basis of a per
capita income. This criteria reflects neither economic, nor social, nor environmental specifics inherent to
Middle-Income Countries.

It is obvious for Belarus that the multidimensional nature of the challenges faced by the countries
of this category, to which Belarus also belongs, requires the application of multidimensional development
criteria that will also be instrumental in designing the UN system's result-oriented strategies.
Belarus hopes that the High-level meeting gathered to comprehensively discuss these issues,
which the President of the UN General Assembly plans to convene ver^' soon, will produce a serious
impetus for the United Nations to proceed with specific measures.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Today, another multidimensional issue Is increasingly coming into our focus. Humanity has
entered a new age as digital technologies drastically change our lives. The importance of digital
economics for sustainable and inclusive economic growth is well grasped in our country. Last March, the
Presidential decree "On the development of the digital economy", whose ambition is to turn Belarus in an
"IT-country", has entered into force. The Belarus' Park of High Technologies has been growing fast,
demonstrating record high rates of growth in residents and exports alike.
Digital technologies are fairly compared with "rocket fuel" for national economies. They make
rapid absorption of innovation into human activities, including education, consumption, and social
cooperation feasible. Moreover, digital technologies stimulate business activity, they generate significant
revenues, and they create new jobs.
At the same time, the digitization cleariy ieads to drastic changes in the labor market, doing away

in the process with a whole array of professions unrequired in the new environment, thereby making
many people involved in the relevant sectors and industries extremely vulnerable.
Clearly, governments in advanced as well as in many developing countries will confront soon a
number of tasks, specifically, how to adjust their own economies to the global digital transformation, how
to manage these processes at the national level effectively, and how to cope with inadvertent
ramifications spurred by digitization.
With this in mind, Belarus proposes to engage in international cooperation on digitization and
technological foresight in ways that facilitate sustainable development.
The purpose of this cooperation is to assist developing countries in finding a niche of their own in
the global digital economy, to multiply the benefits stemming from digitization, and to make sure that
they are to be distributed in an equal and fair manner.
We thus welcome the establishment by the Secretary-General of the High-Level Panel on digital
cooperation and hope that the Panel will pay particular attention to building states' capacities in this area.
It is absolutely clear that strengthening such capacities would be fruitless unless the effort is
predicated on such values as sustainability and prosperity for all. It is precisely these values that
profoundly underlie those tasks that the worid's countries can accomplish cnly together.
Unfortunately, it is also these values that have often been sacrificed to the logic of confrontational
thinking, which we encounter more and more.
At the 2015 UN Summit the President of Belarus contended that sustainable development would

be unattainable in the absence of a lasting peace and security. The point is utterly relevant today.
True sustainability cannot be achieved outside the security framework, which is being tested for
resilience day in and day out.
Ail share in the threat posed by terrorism. Combatting it effectively requires embracing a
comprehensive approach whereby all countries uphold the principles of international law and shun double
standards.

We welcome and stand willing to support the UN leaders' efforts to build a single front against
terrorism. Our country's contribution to the relevant global unifying processes will be a High-level
international conference on preventing terrorism in the digital age, organized by Belarus and the OSCE,
which is to be held in Minsk in a week's time (9-10 October).
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Speaking about international security generally, one cannot help taking note once again of
something evident. The world is facing today unprecedented challenges and threats. The confrontation In
international relations increasingly evokes the notion of a new "Cold War. What is more, one increasingly
hears the voices about likelihoods under which weapons of mass destruction may be used, even if as a
result of an inadvertent conflict or an accident.

This points to the crisis of diplomacy and seriously undermines the UN authority as the key
international organization tasked with preventing international conflicts.

The "degree" of divergence in relations among a number of great Dowers has reached a "boiling"
point. When it comes to some issues, the situation reaches the point of absurdity. The UN's principal

organs, first and foremost, the Security Council are turned into an arena for confrontation and political
self-assertion, with confrontation prevailing over dialogue, and geopolitical ambitions taking the upper
hand vis-a-vis common sense.

Like many in this hall, I, regrettably, do not have recipes for how to mend the matters.

But we are deeply convinced: there is no choice other than to forge a global order on the basis of
"shared values". It Is patently clear, however, that It Is Impossible to arrive at "shared values" by rneans
of coercive "democratization" and violence that are Invoked for the purpose of undermining legitimate
authorities.

The bitter geopolitical experience accumulated over the past three decades tells us that
something In which all of us have a common Interest should constitute the foundation for such values.
We think that the Idea of stability may serve as this paradigm.

Bringing stability means stopping the unwinding spiral of geopolitical chaos in its tracks.

What needs to be done to this end?

First, what stability implies is that states retain their role as the primary international actors and
that state sovereignty is respected.

The contemporary international law is predicated on these key principles enshrined in basic

United Nations documents. In its essence, it is about, on the one hand, the right of states to choose their

own form of political governance, as well as their own path and priorities of development, while, on the

other hand, it is about non-interference of countries In each other's Internal affairs.
Unfortunately, these principles are not universally adhered to. The politics of sanctions, economic
coercion and political Isolation against so called "rogue regimes" has found a solid ground In many
countries' foreign policy toolkits.

We have all been witnesses to decades-long policies of economic, trade and financial blockade

applied against a freedom-loving Cuba, which not only run counter to UN resolutions, but take a heavy
toll on that country's social and economic development.

Second, stability is also about strengthening the state, as well as its role in domestic affairs.
We are absolutely convinced that only a "strong" state can provide security and wellbeing for its
population. We believe that people living In places where "real" authority Is absent, can bear out this
truth better than anyone else.

Therefore, If we really have an Interest In ensuring global stability, we should not undermine the
state, but must rather contribute to making it stronger.

Finally, stability very much relates to relations among great powers, which today must learn once
again to listen to others and hear others' arguments. In addition to be willing to embrace reasonable
compromises.

In the past, it was great powers that had determined the destinies of the world. Today, they
certainly do not enjoy such an exclusive prerogative. Still, unity among great powers In relation to
"shared values" and their leadership In advancing them Is the sina quo non for progress In many areas.

Guided by this logic. President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko came up last year with the
Initiative to begin a comprehensive International security dialogue. Its objective is to overcome existing
controversies that plague Inter-state relations In the Euro Atlantic and Eurasia.
We are convinced that only dialogue can help resolve the deep crisis of trust In International
relations and produce mechanisms conducive to peace and International security, as well as to

sustainable development.
Mr. President,

Can one day or one meeting change history? The great Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru called this
moment a "tryst with destiny".

I think that the common task lying before us Is to increase the number of such moments.

Namely, what we must do is, by means of a common effort, to seek common solutions that will
be acceptable to everyone.
Thank you for your kind attention.

