BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

Address by
H.E. Bakir Izetbegovic
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina

at

the General Debate of the 73'''^ Session of the United Nations General Assembly

New York,25 September 2018

Check against delivery

Madam President,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is my honor to address you for the fourth and final time as the Chairman of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I congratulate Miroslav Lajcak for his leadership of the IT^ Session of the General Assembly.
Together with Secretary-General Guterres, he worked tirelessly to make this Organization more
effective. I am glad the agenda of this year's session will maintain focus on these efforts.

I congratulate Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces on her election. The fact that she is only the fourth
woman to hold this position since 1946 is a reminder that gender equality and empowerment of
women must remain our top priority. She can count on Bosnia and Herzegovina's full support in
getting the work of the General Assembly to be productive and impactful.
Madam President,

Two years ago,from this podium, I reflected on a number of ways and means to make our world
more just and prosperous for all. Standing here today, there is not much to rejoice about, in terms
of progress we have made.

Challenges have continued to multiply uncontrollably. Old conflicts have been magnified, and
new ones have been created. Compared to the past three decades, more countries are engulfed in
crises that are more violent, more disruptive for development, and which result in ever greater
divides. These modem crises and conflicts are rarely confined to their place oforigin. They shake
entire regions, and often proliferate further into the transnational arena.

Record numbers of civilians are victims of indiscriminate yet deliberate armed attacks. Many
more are subjected to persecution, discrimination, marginalization and violations of basic human

rights. Many others fall victim to natural disasters. The number of refugees, displaced persons,
and those in dire need of humanitarian assistance keeps rising. Peace, security and prosperity
remain merely a distant hope for so many human beings around the world.
It is through this lens that I wish to reflect on three issues that are critical to addressing global
problems we face: multilateralism, international law and the rules-based intemational order. For,
I believe that adherence to multilateralism, compliance with international law and shared
commitment to the rules-based global order,are our only hope and only way to resolve the complex
challenges that confront us.

Whether it be conflict prevention or resolution, security, development, climate change, nuclear
proliferation, terrorism, migrations or human rights - none of these problems can be successfully
addressed and resolved by one, three, or five countries alone. Each and every one of these issues

has transnational dimensions. Solving any of them requires transnational, multilateral responses
that are based on dialogue and cooperation between all nations. Effective responses require an
exercise in responsibility and respect for agreed international norms and standards, strong
coalitions based on mutual trust, and a progressive, inclusive and democratic vision and leadership
that embrace a new understanding of national sovereignty.
Yet, today, we are witnessing severe attacks on the rules-based international order, on the
purposes, principles and norms of international law. These attacks pose a grave threat of

undermining international peace and security. There are plenty of examples in our recent past
showing what disregard for international law and the rules-based international order can bring.
These dark chapters of our history were a direct result of the community of nations failing to
uphold the rules and norms upon which the world order has been based, when these very same
rules and norms were challenged.
Madam President,

Our citizens want to live in a peaceful world in which human dignity is respected and fundamental
human rights and freedoms are protected. That is the raison d'etre of this Organization. That
obligation goes far beyond our national borders or interests. No government can focus only on
delivering stability and prosperity to its own people, while ignoring what goes on beyond its
national borders, in its neighborhood and in the wider world. To paraphrase Franklin Roosevelt,

the structurefor solving any ofthe numerous challenges weface, including building andsustaining
world peace, cannot be the work ofone man, one nation, large or small, but a cooperative effort
ofthe whole world. These words resonate today as they did over seven decades ago.
Cooperative approaches have been key to eliminating smallpox, vaccinating record numbers of
infants against preventable diseases, and beating back the menace ofHIV/AIDS. Concerted efforts
and the alliance of all the nations are necessary to contain the risks of nuclear confrontation and

successfully address global issues, such as gender equality, climate change or prosecution of war
criminals on the international level. The spirit of multilateralism is essential in order to bring and
maintain peace, security and development around the world.

A man who championed multilateralism in his life-long work on the world stage, former United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, once said: "More than ever before in human history, we
share a common destiny. We can master it only ifweface it together. And that is why we have the
United Nations."

We must reaffirm the Organization of United Nations as the true embodiment of multilateralism.

It is the only forum that brings together 193 countries to seek joint solutions to global problems
that affect us all. It is the only forum that has the capacity, dedication and compassion to solve
these problems. It is the only forum where the voices of both big and small countries can be
equally heard -even if all ofthose voices are not always equally acknowledged.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is strongly committed to the preservation and strengthening of the
Organization of United Nations, of its values and principles, of its mission and mandate, of its
relevance, credibility and cohesion. To this end, we welcome and support efforts to reform this
Organization so that the voices of all its Member States are more democratically represented in its
deliberations and actions.

Madam President,

Time and again we must remind ourselves of the fundamental values and principles that are
enshrined in the United Nations Charter, and that embody the essence of the rules-based
international order. These principles and values remain equally relevant today as they were
in 1945. The primary responsibility of this Organization and all its Member States is to uphold
and protect these commitments in the face of the modem challenges that profoundly test them.
Upholding the rules-based global order and the rule oflaw in general is essential to preventing and
resolving crises and to sustaining peace. Strong leadership and engagement ofthe United Nations,
and especially its Security Council, in line with the norms of intemational law, is indispensable in
situations like Ukraine, Syria, Iraq and Libya, and in other crisis areas.
Yet, our responses to modem crises and conflicts have unfortunately been marked by disregard for
intemational law, departure from multilateralism and failure to adhere to the rules-based
intemational order, by inaction and by indifference to human suffering and violations of basic
human rights.
Take the Middle East, for example. The conflict in Syria has entered its eight year, and we are
nowhere close to bringing it to a resolution. Some of the most egregious and sustained violations
of intemational humanitarian law in modem times, including indiscriminate use of chemical
weapons, have gone unabated. Civilian casualties are constantly on the rise; the humanitarian
situation keeps deteriorating.

The same applies to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has lasted for more than half a century,
and which has brought about immense human suffering. Holding a region hostage, as individual
national interest compromises the interests of civilians who are caught in the endless cycles of
violence, is unacceptable. The national interest of any country cannot be justified when the most
basic services and means to sustain life are lacking for a large segment of the population.
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to support multilateral efforts to find solutions that would

bring sustained peace and stability to the Syrian people; that will meet the legitimate expectations
of both the Israelis and Palestinians to have two democratic States, living side by side, within
secure and recognized borders in line with international law. As much as finding such solutions
is a political question, it is also a matter ofour common humanity.
Madam President,

Our shared ambition to leave no one behind is also put at serious risk by the evolving threat of
radicalization, violent extremism and terrorism. This modem scourge easily finds fuel for its
sustainment not only in armed conflicts, but also in social and political injustices, discrimination,
marginalization and exclusion, in poverty, unemployment and economic disadvantage.

Violent extremism and terrorism transcend physical and virtual borders. They constantly change
tactics and invent new ways and means to spread. Extremists and terrorists remain intent on

driving a wedge between and within societies, hindering our efforts to maintain peace and security,
protect human rights and foster sustainable development. Our response, therefore, must be
decisive, coherent, comprehensive, and grounded in the international counterterrorism framework
we have created.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains strongly committed to contributing to global efforts to counter
and eradicate this modem menace in all its forms and manifestations. This is a profound challenge
of our time that needs to be confronted at every step and by every means at our disposal.
Madam President,

Nuclear weapons and their proliferation continue to pose a grave threat to our civilization. That

threat perhaps overshadows all the other ones combined. The stakes are as high as they have ever
been. Preventing nuclear proliferation and eliminating weapons of mass destruction concern the
survival of humankind.

Madam President,

The United Nations peacebuilding architecture remains as important as ever in addressing all the
challenges that persist on the path towards sustainable peace around the world. We recognize the
value of introducing the United Nations peacebuilding efforts at an early stage, alongside
peacekeeping activities. Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the vision and efforts of SecretaryGeneral Guterres to mainstream conflict prevention and peacebuilding as priorities of the United
Nations.

As part of a comprehensive response, peacekeeping has proven to be an effective tool for the

United Nations to assist countries on the path from conflict to peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
proud of our contribution to these goals, through our participation in the United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Southern Sudan,Cyprus, Afghanistan, Congo and Mali. We havejoined
over 130 other countries and organizations in endorsing the Secretary-General's Declaration of
Shared Commitments on UN Peacekeeping Operations. We support his efforts to make the United
Nations peacekeeping missions stronger and more effective.
Madam President,

Agenda 2030 is the most powerful connector among the various pillars ofthe United Nations work.
Its implementation is the most important pathway to global peace, security and prosperity. It will

help our states and societies establish resilient institutions that are able to detect, manage and
absorb tension, to address the drivers and root causes ofconflicts and prevent their recurrence, and
to create conditions for inclusive and sustainable development by reducing poverty, inequality and

discrimination, ensuring respect for human rights and combating environmental degradation.
Agenda 2030 is a catalyst for sustainable and inclusive development rooted in respect for
economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights. And that is the best prevention against
conflicts and instability.
Madam President,

Strong global and regional cooperation, be it on matters of conflict prevention and resolution, the
fight against terrorism or the implementation of Agenda 2030, is essential for the success of all
these efforts. Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly values the cooperation we have established within
our region ofthe Western Balkans. We remain committed to advancing that cooperation,including
on our joint path to membership in the European Union.

Madam President,

Bosnia and Herzegovina strives for protection and promotion of values and principles that are
shared by all countries. We believe that the ideals, values and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and the norms and standards inscribed in international law should never be

violated or disregarded. We believe it is the obligation of all countries, big and small, powerful or
less so, to uphold the noble values and principles this Organization is built upon. If any of us lack
the will to uphold these values and principles, then all our endeavors will be less valuable and less
successful.

On that note, I leave you with the words ofa great man. Nelson Mandela,as we mark the centenary
of his birth: "What counts is not the merefact that we have lived. It is what difference we have
made to the lives ofothers that will determine the significance ofthe life we lead."

