Check against delivery

Statement by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Bulgaria H.E. Mr. Boyko Borissov at the
General Debate of the 73^ Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations

New York, 28 September 2018

Madam Chair

Secretary General,
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

I think we should well appreciate that this year's theme of the General Debate is on Global

Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies. It is
comprehensive and provides food for thought on the direction in which our world should
develop, and with it - this international organization.

Global leadership is. first and foremost, a great responsibilitv.

In order for us to achieve

sustainability and standards of life that uphold the principle of dignity for every human being on

this planet, it is absolutely crucial that we demonstrate our commitment and unity in facing the
challenges of our time. I am convinced that we are all aware we need to act with determination
and unity in sharing the responsibility to ensure peace, equality and sustainability of our
communities.

The Republic of Bulgaria has continuously and actively worked for sustaining a world order,
based on rule of law and for reaffirming the principles of multilateral cooperation. And that is
whv I would like to highlight that it is the destiny of the United Nations to plav a central role in
this, and we activelv support this organization in its efforts.

The main global challenges such as conflict resolution and peace-keeping, strengthening global
security and stability, countering climate change, terrorism and ever-deepening inequality,
cannot be addressed bv one single country alone. Thev require shared responsibility and
everyone's contribution.

Global peace and security depend on the stability and sustainable development of the different

parts of our globalized world. Every country - large or small - has the responsibility and the
capacity to make a significant contribution towards security and prosperity in the region where
it is located.

For example, this past Monday, at the high-level event on the global drug problem, organized by

President Trump, every participating country made a firm commitment to fight this global
scourge. It was not by chance that Bulgaria was one of the co-hosts of this event. We have

already pledged our commitment and have proven through our actions the commitment to

fighting against this problem. My country can well serve as a positive example. In order to
achieve peace, security and stability, as well as the Sustainable Development Goals, we all need
to take more of these actions.

The United Nations plays an integral part in promotingthe fair use ofglobal opportunities to the
benefitof all. Inclusive and sustainableglobal growth underpins the implementation of the 2030
Agenda. Achieving the universal-in-nature, and closely interlinked. Sustainable Development
Goals is the key to addressing the current global challenges.

The Bulgarian Presidency of the Council of the European Union, in the first half of this vear.
invested considerable efforts to achieve marked progress and consensus among member-states
along the main goals of the Agenda.

We are proud that, within our 6-month Presidency tenure, the European Union adopted the
mandate to start negotiations for the signing of a new partnership agreement with 79 countries

from Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific. The negotiations aim to achieve an up-to-date and
dynamic partnership with these countries as an important instrument in tackling global
challenges ranging from poverty and inequality to promoting peace and sustainable
development for all.

Madam Chair,

Please allow me to highlight some of the idiosyncrasies of the region where my country, Bulgaria,

is located. This year we mark the lOO^h anniversary of the end of Work War I, which serves to
remind us of the importance of the Balkans in the past, and how relevant they are in the present

day. They have often been the source of conflicts and, to this day, the embers of some of them are
still burning.

In spite of all the circumstances and obstacles before them, countries of South Eastern
Europe, and especially those from the Western Balkans, have managed to achieve
remarkable progress on important and much debated issues, which took several decades to
reach the current state of affairs. That is why we should not stall any further in offering the

unequivocal political support of the international community for each state or initiative that
deserves this support.

Compelling proof of the progress made by the Western Balkans is the recent signing of the

agreements between Sofia and Skopje, and between Athens and Skopje. These agreements are
crucial steps towards stability and security in South Eastern Europe, as well as towards the
Euro-Atlantic prospects of the Western Balkans. The agreement between Podgorica and Pristina
on the border demarcation that just came into force is also a significant milestone. These

documents not only show, but also generate, the new spirit of relations between and among the
countries of this region.

1will give vou one more example. Based on the historic opportunity that the rotating Presidency
of the Council of the EU offered us, Bulgaria initiated a process that put the Western Balkans
back on the agenda of European politics. The opportunities for cooperation and participation of
countries from outside the region in the construction of the new Balkan infrastructure has
already started attracting interest and investments.

An important and emblematic expression of this process was the Leaders' Summit of the

member-states of the EU and the Western Balkan countries in our capital Sofia in May this year.

This was the first meeting of its kind after the Thessaloniki Summit in 2003. Connectivity in all
its dimensions was the focus of discussions, as well as the joint response of the young and

relativelysmall Balkan states to the common challenges we all face to security - such as irregular
migration, organized crime and terrorism, hybrid threats, cyber-security and misinformation.

The so-called Sofia Declaration that was adopted at the Summit confirmed the European
prospects of the region and turned them into an achievablegoal.

We are aware that this is just the beginning of a new path that is both encouraging, but neither
easy, nor quick. However, the stakes are high. Not only for the citizens of these countries, not

only for their EU neighbors and friends, but also for the global processes for economic and

political strengthening and development. We cannot leave "blank spots" marked by, lagging
development, weak economies and societies susceptibleto the present global threats.

Literally, in two days' time, the citizens of our South Eastern neighbor will have to take a

landmark decision about their future and namely, to reaffirm the compromise achieved with
neighboring Greece, which will clear their path towards Euro-Atlantic integration. This is a truly

historic moment. It is now or never. And that is exactly why we need to support them in their
strife for taking this new decision for their country.

Two of our other neighbors are facing a very difficult dilemma. We support the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, we welcome their determination towards normalizing their bilateral
relations with the help of EU mediation. At the same time, we deem the potential "re-tailoring of
borders" a non-viable solution.

Important elections are coming up in October of this year for Bosnia and Herzegovina. They will
be a key test of the unity of the country and its determination to progress further along the path
of European integration.

As you can see, the conditions in this part of Europe are very dynamic and fraught with
important events. They will determine the direction of development of the region for many years
to come. And with that, to a large extent, the state of the EU.

What we have managed to achieve so far, as a result of our work on the main priorities of
Bulgarian foreign policy, is part of our contribution to peace and security on the European
continent and beyond.
*

*

♦

The generally optimistic prospects for the Western Balkans and the South-East European region,
however, are in drastic contrast to the conflicts that surround them from three sides: in the

Ukraine - to the North-East; in the Middle-East - to the South-East; and in Libya to the South.

Direct consequences of the conflicts around the world are the migration flows and the rising
threat of terrorism. I will broach these topics later.

1would like to draw your attention to the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine first. Over the past
four and a half years, according to data from the UN, the total number of victims of the conflict

exceeds ten thousand people, and of the wounded - 24 thousand. Special cause for concern is the
deteriorating humanitarian and environmental situation in Donbas.

Alongside these dire statistics, there is no real progress in implementing the Minsk agreement,

which we think is the only way to find a peaceful and sustainable solution to the conflict. The
existing differences in terms of deployment of international peace-keeping forces in Eastern
Ukraine under the auspices of the UN have also not been overcome.

We, the leaders of the member-states of this international organization share the responsibility
to establish a peaceful, fair and sustainable world order that rests on the principles of the UN

Charter. A want to call on you all to double our efforts in achieving peace and stability in the
Ukraine,without infringing upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.

The situation in Syria remains dramatic. In spite of the efforts of the international community,

military activities in the country continue, leading to an increasing number of casualties among

the civilian population, as well as to thousands of new emigrants. As a country that is
geographically close to Syria, Bulgaria support efforts to prevent further escalation of the
military conflict. Pursuant to this, we support the continuation of political dialogueand the intraSyria negotiations with the aim of finding a permanent political solution to the Syriancrisis.

We support the launch of international initiatives to create conducive conditions for restarting

the Middle-East Peace Process via bilateral talks. We think that this is the way to achieve a final
agreement, based on the principle of two states, coexisting in peace and stability. That is why we
evaluate highly and strongly support the efforts of the UN Special Coordinator for the MiddleEast Peace Process H.E. Nickolay Mladenov, aiming to improve the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip as soon as possible.

In terms of Libva. Bulgaria supports the UN Action Plan and the efforts of the Mission of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, whose primary task is stabilizing the country and

reaching national conciliation in the context of political and institutional fragmentation. We

support the agreements reached by the four key political leaders for conducting presidential and
parliamentary elections.
*

*

9i(

It is impossible to stop all conflicts, but 1 would nevertheless like to say a few words about
another important issue related to peace and security in the word:

We are of the opinion that the Joint Comprehensive Action Plan for the Iranian Nuclear Program

continues to be a key element of the international security architecture. We also support all
efforts for the fiill, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and the

establishment of permanent peace in the region of North-Eastern Asia.

Madam Chair,

The migration flows and the refugee crises are a global phenomenon. They are consequence
of a myriad of political and socio-economic factors, but most of all, of the conflicts in the various

parts of the world. Let me underscore - clearly and right from the start - that irregular migration
is a serious challenge before our societies, with reference to security and stability.

We need to strengthen cooperation with all countries of origin, transit and destination in order
to reach a sustainable and permanent solution. It needs to fully guarantee human rights and also

the sovereign right of states to guarantee the security of their borders.

The efforts of the international communitv need to predominantiv focus on the main causes for

migration - political, socio-economic and natural.

We need to pay special attention to the different dimensions of development and the integral

link between development and security. If we do not back these efforts with active and

mediation and peace-keeping, and if we do not manage to resolve the burning conflict and the
prevention of future ones, chances for success are doomed. And this is where 1 see the crucial

and unique role of the United Nations, which, if there is sufficient political will on the side of
member-states, can and should be strengthened.

During its Presidency of the Council of the EU, Bulgaria took active part in the process of

negotiating the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. The finalizing of the

language of the Compact is an achievement of multilateral cooperation and 1am confident that
its adoption at the inter-governmental conference in Morocco this year will set the ground for

the successful implementation of the first global framework for cooperation in the area of
international migration.

We also welcome the completion of the consultations on the text of the Global Refugee Compact,
which exemplifies a comprehensive response to large-scale migration flows, based on the
principle of shared responsibility.
*

4c 4c

Recently, we have seen an increase in the number of terrorist attacks all over the world, as well

as an increase in the number of innocent victims of terrorism. The irregular migration waves

allow for the infiltration of our countries and communities by former fighters from Syria, Iraq,
Afghanistan and other places, including trained members of terrorist organizations such as IS
and Al-Qaida.

Bulgaria cateeoricallv condemns all forms and expressions of terrorism, no matter the cause for
which thev have allegedly been perpetrated. They undermine peace, security, social and
economic development of states. The effective response to this phenomenon requires the
coordinated efforts of the entire international community.
8

That is why we support the United Nations in its capacity as a universal organization
which possesses the full range of instruments to lead and coordinate the process,

alongside facilitating the exchange of experience among the regional organizations and
the national agencies, and assists the streamlining of their efforts.
We support the work of the Office of the UN to counter terrorism and the specific steps taken to
intensify the operations of the Organization along this line, including support for the

organization of the high-level meeting of heads of national counter-terrorism agencies.
A priority task is to take measures to protect young people from radicalizing or joining terrorist
groups, as well as neutralizing the influence of persons and organizations instigating terrorist
attacks.

Madam Chair,

This year we mark the 70^ anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human

Rights, and Bulgaria will, for the first time, present its candidacy for membership in the UN
Human Rights Council. We rely on the support of member-states. This is not an end in itself for
us, but rather an expression of our consistent policy of protection and assertion of human rights

in Bulgaria and at the global level. Our Presidency of the Council of the EU gave Bulgaria the
opportunity to showcase its contribution to various aspects of the protection of human rights.
We intend to continue to share our best practices as a member of the UN Human Rights Council.

The values that give meaning to any political effort subsume the Past, Present and Future. This
allows us to better comprehend and appreciate our present efforts.

There is a moment in Bulgaria's history which we are justly proud of. 75 years ago, in the darkest
of years during World War II, Bulgaria's citizens, the church and the enlightened leaders and
intellectuals stood up to the attempts to deport close to fifty thousand Bulgarian Jews to the

death camps. And they managed to prevent it from happening. Achieved at a time when Nazi
Germany had subordinated and occupied almost all of Europe.

1 am sharing the story of the salvation of the Bulgarian Jews because it carries a very strong
message relevant to the Present and all people who feel threatened. It shows that humaneness

and courage can win over power and irrationality, and save lives. It reminds us that we should
never cease to fight for human life and the right causes.

The salvation of the Bulgarian Jews is an example much needed today to reassure us that values
are not a forgotten category, but a chance for a better future.

The Bulgarian example should become known to more people so that it can give courage to

others around the world who are currently fighting to defend theirs and others' lives, dignity,
and human rights. It is our mission at present to not allow the return of xenophobia and antisemitism, or the irreverence for the right to live, based on race, ethnicity or other factors. We

Bulgarians know that it is possible and that it has happened before.

To guarantee peace and prosperity around the world is our main task. I am convinced that this is

attainable not through arms or battles, but with more humaneness and a greater sense of
responsibility. We also need more than ever to strengthen the role and authoritativeness of the
United Nations in its global operations.

1am confident that with efforts and good will on the part of all member-states, this grand goal
can be achieved.

Thank you. Madam Chair.

10

