KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
327 East 58th Street, New York, NY 10022

TEL:(212) 336-0777 FAX:(212) 759-7672

STATEMENT BY

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN

Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia

At

The 73'^'' Session of the United Nations
General Assembly

28 September 2018
|New York, USA

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS

327 East 58th Street, New York, NY 10022
TEL:(212) 336-0777 FAX:(212) 759-7672

STATEMENT BY

Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN

Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia

At

The 73'^'' Session of the United Nations

General Assembly
28 September 2018
|New York, USA
SD0osi)®O3Gaeg

Remarks By
Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo HUN SEN

Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia
At the 73*^^ Session of the United Nations General Assembly
28 September 2018
|
New York, USA

- Madam President!

My participation in this General Assembly is in the context that Cambodian Nation is
enjoying the dividends of peace, stability and rapid development \which had never
been before in her modern history. Cambodia is a successful case of a v^ar-torn
country which has succeeded in making a complete and prideful transformation.
Previously infamous for Its killing fields, an unstable region caused by armed conflicts
and dangerous mine disposals, an economically backward country mired in poverty
and food insecurity, Cambodia now enjoys full peace, and has become a popular
tourist destination in Southeast Asia; a food exporter; an outstanding performer in
poverty reduction and improvement in social indicators. Cambodia is recognized as
one of the world's fastest-growing economies, which recently has successfully
graduated from its status as a low-income country to a lower-middle income country,
owing to its high economic grovrth at around 7% per annum over the past two
decades.

Notably known for its armed struggle for the power and changes of government,
Cambodia is now governed by the rule of law and firmly respects the multi-party liberal
democracy, with regular, free and fair elections, held to enable its people to choose
the country's leadership.
In the general election of Cambodia's Sixth Legislature of the National Assembly in
July, nearly 7 million Cambodians, or 83.02% of the total registered voters, cast their
votes and decided on their political choices freely and without any coercion, threat or
violence. Twenty registered political parties have competed in the election which
clearly demonstrated a legitimate representation of pluralist politics and reflected what
thousands of domestic and international observers described as a stable democratic

process in Cambodia and as a free, fair, and credible election.

By their votes, Cambodians reaffirmed their desire for peace, stability and long-lasting
sustainable development. Indeed, the free choice of the Cambodian people and the
legitimate result of this election is not a subject for question or debate. Some external
circles, who have fed on ambition to interfere in the domestic affairs of Cambodia, still
fail to see the quality and integrity of our election process by issuing statements
against or attacking the election outcome. Such actions are a serious assault on the
will of the Cambodian people.

Page 1 of 4

- Madam President!

I would like to draw the attention of all UN members to the vitality of the United
Nations Charter. It depends on all of us to provide a proper respect for this crucial
document by avoiding the interference, damaging, or disrupting sovereignty of an
independent state. We are heartedly regretful to highlight the fact that human rights
nowadays have become "a mission to impose civilization" for some powerful
nations or, perhaps, as their operating standards as the pretext for interference under
the name of political right protection.

As a result, the imposition of unilateral sanctions has become a popular weapon of
powerful nations in managing their international politics, which is completely driven
by their geopolitical agendas. This is nothing but a use of the brutal force of a
particular state to impose its will on other sovereign states. In a world, where the eras
of imperialism and colonialism became the history, we have to acknowledge that not
all nations in this General Assembly shall follow the governing model of any country.
Big countries should not attempt to install their administrative system on other small
countries, because those small countries also possess sovereignty and legitimate
aspiration to maintain their own identities. In the modern-days of interdependence,
such an old style coercive mindset should be put to rest. Together, both big and small
countries, must respect one another and uphold the rules of the international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.
- Madam President!

Currently, the world is facing severe instabilities while the threats to peace are coming
in many forms, more than what we have witnessed in the past 25 years. We are all
living in a world faced with fragility, unpredictability and complicated changes, as
challenges are coming from various fronts, including the increase in persistent conflicts
and unprecedented humanitarian crises.

We are deeply concerned by the tensions made by a first world class superpower in
the diplomatic circle and by the conflicts happening in many places thank to the
interference by this superpower. We are also deeply concerned by the rush decisions
made by this superpower to urgently withdraw from major international agreements
that threaten the core legitimacy of international legal order. These unilateral actions
have undermined the state-to-state relationships and caused tension in the
international community. Yet, what puts the most pressure is a direct attack on
multilateralism. Undoubtedly, In our globalized world, all things are connected. If we
begin to adhere to the protectionist policy, unilateralism and trade war, we are closing

the door by not welcoming any trade and investment opportunities which have
provided prosperity to our countries, both small and big ones, for many decades.
Eventually, we all are poorer; our economies will decline; financial capital will shrink
and the ability to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as well as,
addressing the challenges caused by climate change would be seriously affected.
Those factors will make poor countries suffer prolonged poverty, and thus we are
more vulnerable to the dangerous ideology of terrorism, extremism, and regional
conflicts.

Page 2 of 4

Cambodia, as a small economy, believes In the Interests of rule-based International
cooperation. As a matter of fact, we all have been prospering because of globalization.
We all are thus convinced that the global trade should not be hindered by the
Imposition of unilateral tariffs; yet It should be enhanced and supported through the
adherence to conducive policies for trade and Investment, as well as, the provision of
special preferential treatments to developing countries. Stability and diversification In
the financial sector need to be further encouraged to promote Innovation and
development. All In all, we need to jointly maintain and strengthen
^'multiiateralism".

In fact, peace without development Is not sustainable. In this context, ^^Sustainable
Development Goals" of the United Nations play a pivotal role In guiding toward
prosperity for the peoples. Cambodia views the SDGs as an Important opportunity to
mobilize efforts In achieving poverty reduction, as well as, sustainable and Inclusive
development. The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) soon will approve
'Xambodia Sustainable Development Goals (CSDGs)" which has been fully
localized, and we will use those goals to shape our medium and long-term policies and
plans for Cambodia.
Moreover, the conflict prevention Is a precondition for a long-lasting peace. The UN
Peacekeeping forces play a vital leading role In these efforts. As a result, Cambodia
greatly welcomes the vision of H.E. Antonio Guterres, the UN Secretary-General,
on peace-bullding and peace-keeping, particularly further paying continued attention
to the confllctlon prevention. Cambodia Is a consistent supporter of the architecture
of peace and security of the United Nations. For Instance, for the last 12 years,
Cambodia has sent thousands of Blue Helmet forces to join peace-keeping missions
under the umbrella of the United Nations. However, peace-keeping Is facing
unprecedented challenges since the non-state actors have waged rebellion wars
against our peace-keeping forces, which have caused many lives and disabilities. We
are sincerely Indebted to the sacrifice of these UN peace-keeping heroes. Nonetheless,
their death and sacrifice have not distorted our commitment to further contributing to
the cause of this great mission.
Another severe and complicated threat which Is the barriers to the long-lasting peace
Is terrorism. They have disintegrated communities, worsened the conflicts and
weakened the stability of the whole region. Currently, the battles against terrorism
have become even more complex and modernized since the terrorists are turning to

the cyberspace for their malevolent operation. Profoundly, the cross-border nature of
terrorism requires us to build a multilateral cooperation with concerted coordination.
Including ^^countermeasures" and ^^preventlve measures".
Addressing climate change Is another key element for the success of the 2030 Agenda,
which requires urgent and focused attention from the global community. The
fundamentals for action on climate change are undoubtedly rested upon the Paris
Agreement. In this spirit, Cambodia will provide full support to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to organize the Climate Summit next year to foster the Inspiration
to further address climate change.
Page 3 of 4

- Madam President!

Finally, I would like to emphasize that Cambodia fully supports the UN's global
leadership, and commits to Implementing our shared responsibility to build a peaceful
and equitable human society who enjoys sustainable and Inclusive development.

Thank you for your attention!

Page 4 of4

