Statement by H. E. Mr. Marc-André Blanchard,
at the General Debate
rd
of the 73 session of the General Assembly
1 October 2018

Together, through uncharted territory
Canada is honoured to help close this General Debate of the 73rd
session of the United Nations General Assembly.
Let me start with a simple question. Why does the UN matter?
The answer is also simple.
The magnitude of the contemporary challenges the world is
confronting, from climate change to terrorism, from economic
inequality to irregular migration, from protracted crises to
humanitarian emergencies, demands action.
Each of these challenges is systemic. None can be solved by
countries acting in isolation or bilaterally. All of them require the
world to work together.
The UN is the only place where we all come together to tackle
these challenges.
Indeed, this UN General Assembly – our Assembly – is the only
forum where representation is global.
This representation not only bestows legitimacy, it affords
opportunities to harness diversity of thought and experience, of
skills and knowledge, and of ideas, in support of better outcomes
for all.
Since the beginning of the postwar project, Canada has been at
the heart of the UN. A Canadian, John Peters Humphrey was
1

among the drafters of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We were at the advent of peacekeeping.
We helped to build the institutions at the core of the rules-based
international order. But these rules and institutions were not, and
should not be, static entities, impervious to change.
Notwithstanding their tremendous achievements, we should
acknowledge that the benefits of these rules and institutions have
not been evenly distributed.
Too many remain excluded, economically, socially and politically,
from the decision-making that affects their lives.
The “greatest generation” that came out of the ashes of the
Second World War was great not because times were simpler, or
the challenges less complex.
They were great because they found a way to work together, in
common cause for collective outcomes. Their work helped to
ensure stability and relative peace and security for over 70 years.
We owe it to them, and to us, to continue to work together to
make our multilateral world order more efficient, fairer and more
inclusive.
That is why supporting the implementation of the current UN
reforms led by our Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, is so
essential.
Together, to make multilateralism work for everyone.
Agenda 2030 is a phenomenal achievement of the United
Nations. For the first time in history, we agreed on a
comprehensive strategic plan to achieve a sustainable world.
The plan brings us to uncharted territory. Sticking to old
approaches will not help us meet its targets.

2

We ought to find new ways of doing things, for silos to be broken
between governments and civil society, between governments
and the private sector, between north and south; between the
traditional so called like-minded and non-traditional like-minded.
We ought to do things differently at the UN and in our
governments to better deliver results for people on the ground.
We ought to hold fresh, frank and inclusive discussions.
We ought to develop a greater sense of urgency.
We ought to reconsider our approach to risk. Inaction is a risk for
governments and people, but also for investors.
We ought to identify the opportunities in our challenges.
We ought to look at new partnerships to harness new
opportunities.
As our Secretary General says: “Climate change is the defining
issue of our time.”
A significant component of the response to climate change is
new, greener and more resilient infrastructure. This represents a
26 trillion-dollar opportunity for us all.
To harness this opportunity, starting with the most vulnerable,
small island states, we must all work together with scientists,
multilateral institutions, regional banks, investors, and civil society
like never before.
Not building essential infrastructure is not an option. As Prime
Minister Trudeau said in this very Assembly: “Developing
countries should not be punished for a problem they did not
create, nor should they be deprived the opportunities for clean
growth that developed nations are now pursuing.”
And we should all support Africa as it works to create
opportunities for its youth and meet the ambitions of its Agenda
3

2030 through greater economic integration and prosperity. Doing
so is key to a more secure world.
Greater, and more shared, prosperity leads to greater peace.
Bringing people together is at the heart of Canada’s national
identity. In Canada, we have come to understand that diversity is
our strength.
Indigenous peoples in Canada are the bedrock of our diversity.
They speak more than 60 different languages. Their cultures are
some of the richest on the continent.
One in every five Canadians was born outside of the country. Our
largest urban centres are among the most cosmopolitan on earth.
Over 50% of the populations of both Vancouver and Toronto were
born outside Canada.
Canada has become home to refugees and new Canadians for
decades. While we are very proud to have welcomed over 50 000
Syrian refugees over the last three years, we are fully aware that
many countries have also shown great leadership in welcoming
many more.
I must say, one of the things that makes me very proud is that
40% of the Syrian refugees we have welcomed – some 20,000
people – have been directly sponsored by private citizens who
choose to personally contribute.
Of course, our track record on promoting economic and social
integration will always require work and action. While we have
had important successes, we have made mistakes and still face
challenges – the most important of which remains reconciliation
with First Nations.
In Canada, we understand that we need to listen and to learn in
order to contribute to better outcomes. It is what we do; both at
home and abroad.
4

Together, to break down barriers and connect people to
opportunity
We are using our G7 presidency this year both to listen as well as
to learn from others, but also to innovate and break down silos.
For the first time, to ensure that governments were delivering in a
more cohesive manner, Canada convened ministers of Finance
and ministers of International Development together to explore
new ways of financing development.
We can’t afford anymore to have discussions at the UN that are
distinct from those at the World Bank or the IMF.
We also felt very strongly that the G7 needed to tackle the issue
of climate resilience and disaster recovery. While Canada has its
own extensive coast lines and borders on three oceans, we
invited small island, coastal African, and southeast Asian states to
this critical conversation.
Building on the UN Oceans Conference, this discussion produced
a charter seeking to ban the use of plastics in our oceans, and is
paving the way to the Sustainable Blue Economy Conference in
Nairobi this year that Canada is proud to be co-hosting with
Kenya.
We partnered with the World Bank and others to raise close to
$3.8 billion to reduce the barriers that women and girls face in
accessing education in conflict and fragile states. Their
inclusion will lead to exceptional benefits for
their communities, and by extension, for the world.
We also need capital that flows faster and at scale in emerging
and frontier markets.
For this reason, we are also working together with partners from
across the United Nations and the private sector to unlock the
capital that will connect people to opportunities.
5

As a direct result of the work we do here at the UN, just a few
days ago at the high-level meeting on financing the SDGs, Prime
Minister Trudeau announced the establishment of a Toronto
affiliate of the Global Infrastructure Hub to do precisely that:
leverage Canadian expertise in infrastructure to help connect
capital to projects.
These projects fuel long-term economic growth and support the
transition to a low-carbon economy while making progress
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and
improving the representation of women and marginalized groups
in sustainable infrastructure.
Together, for enduring Peace and Security
Our commitment to multilateralism – notably UN peacekeeping –
includes a commitment to renewal and reform, a commitment to
make the system our grandparents built fit for purpose in the 21st
century.
Canada is proud to have increased its contribution to UN
Peacekeeping operations and to have adopted smart pledging –
sending the people and equipment that are most needed to the
places where they are most useful.
Canada is spearheading the Elsie Initiative – a practical plan to
act on our shared promise to double the number of women in
peacekeeping operations. We set that as a goal, first and
foremost, because of our shared belief in the fundamental equal
rights of women.
We also know that having women in the ranks – and in charge –
makes peacekeeping more effective and its results more durable.
We look forward to working with our new partners, Ghana and
Zambia, to better recruit train, retain and promote women across
all of our police and military forces.
6

For the international rules-based order to work for all, the rules
need to apply to all.
Accountability cannot be a luxury afforded only when
circumstances allow.
As is the case everywhere, Canada’s actions in Myanmar, Syria,
Ukraine and Venezuela are guided by an unequivocal
commitment to protecting and promoting human rights.
The crimes against humanity committed against the Rohingya of
Myanmar, including the systematic use of rape as a weapon of
war, are utterly unacceptable.
Canada’s parliament unanimously adopted a motion naming
these crimes as genocide and urging the Security Council to refer
these appalling acts to the ICC. The plight of the Rohingya people
demands a response.
Canada is appalled by crimes the Assad regime in Syria has
committed against its own people, including most horrifically the
use of banned chemical weapons. Syrians rightly demand
accountability and hope for an enduring political solution.
The White Helmets, many of whom gathered evidence of
chemical weapon attacks at risk of death, rightly expect our
support in seeking justice.
In Canada’s own hemisphere, an OAS panel of independent
international experts carefully documented many of the crimes
being committed by the Maduro regime against its own people.
Here too, Venezuelans hope for accountability. For this reason,
we and our regional partners took the exceptional step of referring
this case to the ICC.
The ongoing illegal annexation and occupation of Crimea is a
clear breach of international law. Respect for state sovereignty
7

and territorial integrity are not mere notions; they are the
foundations of the UN charter. Russia’s destabilizing actions
cannot be allowed to stand.
Our determination to ensure accountability in Myanmar, Syria,
Ukraine and Venezuela is accompanied by a deep commitment to
improve the humanitarian situation for the millions affected, both
within those countries as well as across those regions.
We recognize that the disproportionate share of the responsibility
for providing lifesaving support to so many has fallen on
neighboring countries, and pledge to continue our support for
them as well.
And we will continue to contribute to the work of the United
Nations in addressing these challenges.
Canada's candidacy for the United Nations Security Council
(2021-22)
When the international rules-based order was designed, this
Assembly mandated the Security Council to authorize the use of
force, to keep the peace, and to keep us safe.
Seventy years later, that remains its core responsibility.
The Security Council’s agenda is replete with persistent and
emerging challenges.
Some security threats we know all too well; others are emerging,
and others still we have yet to anticipate. But all are systemic and
require collective responses.
Be they old or new, these threats will continue to test the Security
Council's ability to adapt and respond.
That is why Canada is seeking a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council in 2021-2022. We are confident that we can
contribute to effective, carefully considered global responses
8

We have a proven record of working with other member states to
bring fresh ideas and innovative approaches to tackle complex
problems, from peacekeeping and policing to peacebuilding and
transitions.
We are confident that we can harness the diversity of ideas and
experience necessary to fashion forward-looking approaches that
can work.
After all, bringing people together is our calling card. A capacity
for cooperation defines our national character. Inclusion is part of
our identity.
When Canada has served on the UN Security Council, we have
done so inclusively.
We brought other states and civil society into the conversation.
We championed the Women, Peace and Security Agenda and
Human Security. We fought for the protection of civilians caught in
the crossfire of armed conflict.
If elected to the Security Council, we will bring to bear our
longstanding dedication to peacekeeping, our over thirty years of
service as Chair of the UN’s Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, and our active membership on the Peacebuilding
Commission.
If elected, we will work with others to tackle climate change and
violent extremism, and to promote economic security and the
empowerment of women and girls.
We will champion inclusion and accountability, openness and
transparency, in all of the UN Security Council’s deliberations.
We will help to find solutions to build a safer, fairer, and more
secure world, where the benefits of the international rules-based
order are distributed more evenly.
9

We are confident that the institutions we have spent more than
seven decades building can be renewed and revitalized.
But we can only do this effectively, if we do it together.
Thank you. Merci.

10

