Please check against delivery

(Translation)

Multilateralism, Shared Peace and Development

Statement by H.E. Wang Yi

State Councilor and Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of China
At the General Debate of the 73rd Session of the UN General Assembly
New York, 28 September 2018

Madam President,

Every September, global attention focuses on the United Nations and

on this stately Assembly HalL People watch closely what is happening
here, hoping that the United Nations will deliver to the world peace,

development, harmony and prosperity. People look to the UN to help
realize their dream for a better life, a UN that is committed to "Making
the United Nations Relevant to All People", thus making our world a
better place for everyone to live in.

The contemporary international order, which began with the founding
of the United Nations, is based on the purposes and principles of the UN
Charter and enhanced by the vision and practice of multilateralism. It has,

over the past 70 years or more, brought about general peace and rapid
development A people-centered philosophy has gained wide acceptance,
and broad consensus has formed on the need for inter-dependence and

win-win cooperation. Yet, it is also true that the international order today

faces problems and challenges and needs steady reform and
improvement.

The world is changing. As we celebrate mankind*s proud
achievements and progress in an ever-changing world, we must never
lose sight of the challenges and difficulties we face, and must remain
vigilant. What we see today is that international rules and multilateral

mechanisms are under attack, and the international landscape is filled
with uncertainties and destabilizing factors.
Should we stay committed to multilateralism or let unilateralism have

its way? Should we seek to uphold the architecture of the world order or

allow it to be eroded upon and collapse? These are questions of critical

importance bearing on the future of all countries and the destiny of
mankind, questions that all countries must carefully reflect on and seek
answers to.

China s answer is clear-cut. All along, China has upheld the
international order and pursued multilateralism. Though once kept out of
the UN for 22 years, China has never wavered in its conviction to

multilateralism and to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter.

China stayed true to its commitment throughout the negotiation process
on its return to the GATT and then accession to the WTO, negotiations
that lasted 15 long years and were concluded at a certain price. China
fulfilled its promise and integrated itself into the world economic system.
After the international financial crisis broke out, China chose not to stand

idly by but to work together with other countries to tide over rough times.
For years running, China has contributed to over 30% ofglobal growth. It
has played its part inhelping restore global recovery.

In the face of new developments and severe challenges, China will
keep to its commitment and remain a champion of multilateralism.

Standing at this podium back in 2015, Chinese President Xi Jinping, in
his statement reflecting the keen understanding of mankind's common

interests and the future of our planet, called for building a community
with a shared future for mankind. This major initiative is in keeping with
the trend of history, and it echoes the call of the times. It adds to our

conviction and strength as we pursue the common endeavor to protect
this global village. It points to the direction for us to work together to
open up an even better future for mankind. To uphold multilateralism in

the new era, we believe the following principles need to be adhered to:

First, we must pursue win-win cooperation. Our world is undergoing
profound changes unseen in a century. Also unseen before are the

problems and challenges we are faced with. No country can meet them

alone or stay immune to their impact. What we need to do is to replace
confrontation with cooperation and coercion with consultation. We must

stick together as one big family instead of forming closed circles. We
must promote common development through consultation instead of

taking a winner-takes-all approach. This is a sure way for a bright future
to be ushered in to the world.

Second, we must act upon rules and order. State-to-state relations

should be based on credibility, not willful revocation of commitments.

International cooperation should be guided by rules, not impulse.
Practicing multilateralism is, first and foremost, about upholding the UN

Charteri observing international law and the basic norms governing
international relations and honoring international agreements reached

upon through negotiations.

Third, we must uphold fairness and justice. In international affairs,

fairness and Justice means equality between all countries, big or small. It
means responsibility for big countries to help the small and the rich to

assist the poor. Fairness and justice also means respect for other countries'
sovereignly, independence and territorial integrity, as well as their choice
of development path and the right to a better life and to more
development opportunities.
Fourth, we must act to deliver real results. Multilateralism is not

about making empty rhetoric. It must be pursued to solve problems.
Efforts must be targeted, results-oriented, and measured by visible
progress. Whether a multilateral mechanism works depends on the will
and engagement of countries in the world. It is imperative that we work
together to uphold the international system with the United Nations at its

core as well as the multilateral trading system centering on the World
Trade Organization.

Multilateralism requires a strong United Nations. China supports
Secretary-General Guterres in his endeavor to advance reform of the UN

system in the three critical areas of peace and security, economic

development and internal management. Such reform should be led by
member states. It should be designed to prioritize concerns of developing
countries, make the UN more efficient and enhance oversight and
accountability. Crucial to the UN's proper functioning is stable and
predictable funding. China will continue to fulfill its due financial

obligations, and China calls upon other member states to pay their
membership contributions and peacekeeping assessments on time and in

full.

Madam President,

The course ofdevelopment and progress for humanity is unstoppable.
Peace, reconciliation and harmony are the surging trend, while war,
conflict and terror are opposed by all. Equality, mutual trust and win-win
cooperation are the call of our times, whereas power politics and the law

of the jungle find no support. As a major responsible country, China
commits itselfto the path of peaceful development, and China will work

with other countries and contribute its share to global peace and security.
I

Since this year, the situation on the Korean Peninsula has seen a

major turnaround thanks to the efforts of all parties concerned. China, on
its part, has contributed to such development. China supports all-out
improvement of relations between the North and the South of the

Peninsula, as well as efforts to facilitate dialogues between the DPRKand

the US, China encourages the DPRK to continue moving along the right
direction of denuclearization. At the same time, we believe it is also right
for the US to make timely and positive responses so as to truly meet the
DPRK half way. China will continue to honor its due international

responsibility and obligation, and will strictly implement Security
Council resolutions related to the DPRK. Meanwhile, China calls upon
the Security Council to take timely actions in light of the development
and changes of the situation to create more favorable conditions for a

peaceful settlement of the Peninsula issue through political and

diplomatic means. Effective settlement of the issue requires complete
denuclearization as well as establishment of a peace mechanism. Only
when the two wheels move in tandem can the issue be truly resolved and

can peace start to dawn.

Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, now is a crucial time for

continued implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action

(JCPOA). The JCPOA is a consensus-based multilateral agreement
endorsed by the UN Security Council. It serves the comihon interests of

all parties concerned and the international community at large. If the
agreement

fails

to

be

implemented,

the

international

nuclear

non-proliferation regime will be undermined, the authority and role of the
Security Council challenged, and peace and stability in both this region
and the wider world jeopardized. That is a scenario in which no one

stands to gain. China urges parties concerned to continue observing and
implementing the JCPOA. On this basis, possibility could be explored for
a dialogue platform that is inclusive and transparent to facilitate proper
settlement of each party's concerns through dialogue andconsultation.
The question of Palestine must not be marginalized. For more than
seven decades, peace and justice have remained elusive in that part ofthe
world. On this issue, what the international community needs most is not
proposal or initiative, but rather resolve and action. To implement the
two-state solution, a new round of peace-promoting efforts need to be
made to explore a new mediation mechanism. To that end, China will
play its part and Chinese humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people will continue.

The issue involving Rakhine State of Myanmar cannot be resolved

overnight, and steady progress needs to be made through a three-phased
process involving cessation of violence, return of displaced persons and
economic development. Myanmar and Bangladesh are inseparable

neighbors, and could well be inseparable partners. Yesterday, at my
meeting with colleagues from Myanmar and Bangladesh and also in the
presence of Secretary-General Guterres, agreement was reached between
Myanmar and Bangladesh on accelerating the return of the first batch of

displaced persons. We believe Myanmar and Bangladesh are capable of
resolving this issue properly through friendly negotiations.

China supports the UN*s leading role in coordinating responses to
non-traditional security challenges. In the new frontiers of global
governance like cyber space and outer space, state sovereignty must be
upheld, rules observed, and responsibilities honored. Terrorism, a menace

to the entire human society, should by no means be justified. Security
Council resolutions must be earnestly implemented to counter cyber
terrorism, terrorist financing and the spread of radical narratives, so as to
remove the breeding ground ofterrorism.

Madam President,

Development is essential for our world today. We need to address

both insufficient development and, more important, the imbalance in

development. There is no one-size-fits-all model. Eveiy country is
entitled to explore a development path that suits itself to deliver

happiness and security to its people, and bring a future of confidence and

hope to its children. Countries face various questions in development.
Questions themselves could be turned into drivers for reform, and
solutions to problems could bring about development.

Economic globalization should not be a process for some to gain and
others to lose, still less should it result in widening the gap between the

North and the South. It is important that we adapt ourselves to the trend
of economic globalization, and see to it that such a process is open,
inclusive, balanced and win-win to deliver benefits to all.

International trade is complementary and win-win by nature. It should
not be a zero-sum game in which one gains at the expense of others, and
no one should be allowed to place its own interest above the interest of
others. Protectionism will only hurt oneself, and unilateral moves will

bring damage to all. Regarding trade frictions, China stands for a proper
settlement based on rules and consensus through dialogue and
consultation on an equal footing. China will not be blackmailed or yield
to pressure. China has taken steps not just to defend its own legitimate

rights and interests. China is also acting to uphold the free trade system
and international rules and order for the benefit ofglobal recovery and the
common interests of all countries.

Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
should top the agenda ofthe current session ofthe General Assembly. We
need to incorporate the implementation of this agenda into the
development strategies of member states and pursue innovation-driven,
coordinated, green and open development that benefits all. We need to

forge closer partnerships for development and pursue international
development cooperation with the UN at its center, North-South
cooperation as the main channel, supplemented by South-South
cooperation. To meet climate change is crucial to achieving sustainable

development. China hopes to see negotiations on the implementation
guidelines ofthe Paris Agreement be concluded, as scheduled, by the end
of this yearto boost joint efforts for global ecological conservation.

Madam President,

In pursuing our common cause for development and progress for
humankind, China has worked in partnership with other countries of the

international community. This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's
reform and opening-up program. Over the past 40 years, we have worked
hard and forged ahead successfully along a path of socialism with
Chinese characteristics.

This path has brought fundamental changes to China. Over the past 40
years, more than 700 million of the Chinese population have been lifted
out of absolute poverty, which accounts for over 70% of the global total

in the same period. A basic medical insurance system has been set up to
cover the 1,35 billion Chinese people, and a social pension network
accessible to over 900 million people is now fiilly instituted. These are

truly remarkable achievements in the history of human development.
Starting from scratch, China has built some 25,000 kilometers of

high-speed railway. This accounts for two thirds of the global total and

helps elevate global infrastructure construction. According to polls
conducted by authoritative international polling agencies, China tops
global rankings in terms of public satisfaction with its development and
of public confidence in the future of development.

The path of development China pursues has provided the world with

opportunities for common development. Over the past 40 years, China's

foreign trade has registered an average annual growth of 14.5%. This has
sustained impetus, for global growth and offered the world a huge Chinese
market. We have every confidence to maintain the momentum and realize

high-quality development. China will speed up efforts to build an

advanced economic system, and this will create greater trade
opportunities and an even better investment environment for other
countries. Going forward, China will not reverse course or shut the door
close. China will open still wider to the world. China will not erect
market barriers but will expand access to the Chinese market. Of all

developing countries in the world, China has been the fastest in opening
up to a level that is unparalleled by others. When itcomes to overall tariff
reduction, China has accomplished more than what it committed when

joining the WTO. The breadth ofChina's openness in services is close to
the average level ofdeveloped countries. This November, China will host

the first International Import Expo in Shanghai. It will be yet another
major step to open China's market. Countries are welcome to take an
active part in the event.

The Belt and Road Initiative proposed by President Xi Jinping is a
public good China offers the world. Indeed, it has grown into the largest
platform for international cooperation. It aims to deliver benefits for all

through consultation and cooperation. The Initiative is open, transparent
and inclusive; it is based on international rules and laws, and it aims to

achieve green, environment-fnendly and sustainable development. It is
about pursuing common prosperity through greater complementarity
among participating countries. By September this year, over 130

countries and international organizations have signed agreements on Belt
and Road cooperation with China. Next year, China will host the second
Belt and Road Forum for Intemational Cooperation, and we welcome all
parties to go and attend this event.

China IS the largest developing country in the world. To strengthen
cooperation and solidarity with other developing countries has been and
10

will continue to be the staunch strategic priority for China's diplomacy.
This is determined by what defines China as a country and by the system
and values China upholds. No matter how much China has grown in
strength, and however the international landscape may change, this
strategic priority of China will remain unchanged.
Madam President,

The United Nations is the premium platform to advocate and practice
multilateralism. We hope the current session of the General Assembly
will go down in the record for its part in upholding multilateralism and
world peace and development. We hope that all of us in the international

community will support the UN in playing its central role in international

affairs. And we call upon people of all countries to join hands and work
together to build a community with a shared future for mankind.

II

