Address
by the President of the Republic of Croatip
Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic

at the
United Nations General Assembly 2018

Making the United Nations relevant to all people:
Global leadership and shared responsibilities
for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies

New York, 26 September 2018

Your Excellencies, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
Madam President ( aria Fernanda Espinosa Garces),
We live in times of great opportunit es and serious challenges. We are
more interconnected than ever, yet the world remains divided in many
ways.

-

-

.

¦-

¦

Technological developments have enabled our world to truly become a
global village. Our citizens have become global citizens and are well
informed and strongly driven by developments around the world. They

expect global leadership in these times of rapid changes and great
complexity and look for inspiration in all of us.

What is it that people are looking for today? What is it that they expect
of a leader? Mighty words? They don t really matter much anymore.
Mighty deeds? Yes, indeed. But, foremost, what they expect of us are
the simplest of gestures that bring us together, that show our
compassion and respect for each other. They expect integrity and
inspiration.
This summer - of all things - football triggered a global response,
uniting us for a moment in our common aspirations for excellence.
Af er the success of the Croatian national team, I have received so many
congratulatory letters and messages from all corners of the world. From
China, Australia and Saudi Arabia, from France, to Trinidad and Tobago
and Nepal. I thank everyone for their kind words.
Team CROATIA really played well... they won our hearts , kindly said

Vishal Bagale of India, and Shabbir Allam wrote in Croatian: „SVI KAO
JEDNO!" -,/ e're all like one!"

Gilberto Castillo of Colombia pointed out: "(Final) Muy merecida para un
pais que se supera como gran ejemplo, despues de las duras situaciones
historicas vividas. Todo un ejemplo a seguir .
i

:y!

Opshori Nondona, a 14 year old girl from Dhaka, Bangladesh, was

especially persistent in getting her message through: This year, the
whole world has recogniz d a small beautiful country - Cro tia - through
the passion and the power of football. Now the world knows how
powerful a small beautiful nation can b .
This is just a fraction of sud 'mess ges and what most of tnem had in
common, what I could read through each of tHemc s that Croatia - a

country not big in the size of its t rritory or the number of its population
or its economic means - has thus become a metaphor for all of these
kind peopl , of what a country can do to inspire others and to arrive on

top of the world, winning the earts of people worldwide, and rousing
enthusiasm that e ch of t eir countries can do the same.
The value of a nation is not measured by its size, underlined Bernard
Stem of France. And, indeed, to excel you don t need physical size; you
need heart and persistence, and above all, you need to share a vision
and to work together to make it happen. It is not the size of one's
territory that matters; it is the size and quality of ideas. Magnitude is not
measured only in volume, but even more in determination to reach the
goal.

Individual players might have shown gr at skill and technique in the
field, but the reason that they triumphed was because they played
together as a team.

Excellencies,
The United Nations is a place where we must show our willingness to act
together and play together as a team. Our adversaries are many:
poverty, hunger, terrorism, extremism and instability, lack of education,
gender inequali y and exclusion of women in many societies,
environmental hazards, endangered security and trampled human
dignity. We - the leaders - should think of ourselves as a team that
needs to work together, to take advantage of our strengths and to
2

'

¦ i'

T

address our weaknesses in order to make our world a better place and
to inspire excellence globally.

We should lea not only in managing crises and solving problems, but in
spreading hop and optimism as w ll. We must demonstrate our
humanity, solidarity and. 'compassion. In doing so we must, above all
elsey respect eadi' othen Respect is'the most 'valuable 'asset that we
have in interpersonal and international relations.
It is our responsibility as UN Member States to maintain the relevance,
the effectiveness, and the efficiency of our Organization and to be up-tothe-task for whatever challenge that may arise.
However, raising awareness on the most pressing issues is not enough.
We must also push for the adoption of the necessary instruments and
frameworks and, most of all, secure their implementation. Without such
an approach this podium will remain merely a self-serving global stage.
Just words without deeds.
Throughout the years, we have learned, often the hard way, that
governments and international organizations alike have their limits. This
has also taught us of the value and importance of inclusiveness and of
the important role that the private sector, academia, civil society and
brilliant individuals can have in many ifferent fields.
Croatia has many a Luka Modric, and not only in sports. Our people
excel in so many areas: Marin Soljacic who is a modern day Nikola Tesla
and develops a wireless transfer of energy; Iva Tolic with her
breakthrough work in molecular cell biology; Ivan Mrvos, developer of
smart city furniture for the cities of future; Mate Rimac with his electric
cars, to name just a few among the countless others.
Let us push formal limits of our organizations away from us! Let us
embrace talent that is abundant around us!

Let us inspire through science and innovation, through our brilliant

individuals at home and in our well established, hardworking diaspora
around the world. Let us inspire through our dedicated and tireless work
in the United Nations. Deeds, not words. Inclusion, not exclusion or
isolation. Empowerment. Motivation. Those are all keys to success.
.We are the global village, out ore' often tftan nofe ...we tend to miss the
Opportunity to bring the global agenda to our homes, to'otiErco munities
and our families. Likewise, we forget to include our homes, communities

and families on the global agenda. It takes great tragedi s caused by
catastrophes, global cri es, wars and climate change, to remind us of
what we ll s an o lose.

In today s world, such an approach embodied in multilateralism is under
ever-increasing strain. This is of particular concern since the most
important issues for the mankind cannot be resolved by any state singlehandedly, or in isolation. ultilateralism is indispensable, but I would
agree with those who call for changes in the multilateral system. We
should not be complacent, and we need to rethink ecades old
mechanisms and instruments in order to adapt them to the modern
times and contemporary needs.
Excellencies,
As we celebrate two very important anniversaries this year - 70 years of

the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and 25 years of the Vienna
Declaration and Program of Action - it is a fitting occasion to remember
that respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law has always
been a precondition for long-term stability, peace and development.
We should not forget the 70th Anniversary of the Convention on the
Preven ion and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide either. We must
learn from the tragedies of Srebrenica and Rwanda, a shame for United
Nations as described by the great Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to
whom I pay a special tribute. These darkest hours must never be
forgotten.
4

Ladies and Gentlemen

This year Croatia marked its fifth year of membership in th European
Union. Croatia is a tell ng example of the transformative force of the EU
memb rship, of the benefits: 'of--accession 'to the area where p ace,

freedom/ human dignity and prosperity are standards, not mereide lsr
For these reasons, among others;; oatia strongly supports further EU
enlargement to our south-eastern neighbourhood.

R solving all outstanding l gacies of war, while constructively engaging
in regional cooperation and good neighbourly relations is essential.

Within this framewor we will continue to focus especially on th rights
of minorities, missing persons, war crimes jurisdiction, victims of war,
and domestic processing of war crimes.

Good and mutually beneficial neighbourly relations depend on a large
egree on the words co ing from across the border. For inflammatory
and revisionist rhetoric, spurr d by the need for domestic political needs,
takes just a moment to be spoken; however, to repair the damag
cause by t k s much, much longer.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, our closest neighbour and a country of
utmost importance for Croatia, we see a risk of legal uncertainty and

political and institutional instability after the upcoming October elections,
due to the failure to amend the electoral framework so that it fully
respects the rights and equality of the three constituent peoples Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs - in line with the Constitutional Court
decision on the legitimate and proportionate representation of
constituent peoples at all levels of government, including the Presidency.
Although the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue is for the two sides to resolve,
we should b cautious and extremely careful when it comes to proposals

with potential regional implications, most notably the ideas regarding
territorial (ex)changes: Otherwise, we may (re)open the Pandora s box
5

of potential new territorial claims potentially provo ing serious instability
and security threats.
There are inspiring developments demonstrating brave leadership as
well. We warmly welcome the signing of th agreement on the name
issue'Whietr has been rec ntly r ached betw en Skopje and thens an
¦hope that the referendum this Synday ill represent ¦a crucial impetusfor th ooiystey s successful continuation of its Euro-Atlanticrintegraf on.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

By a opting the 2030 Agen a, along with the historic Paris Agreement
on Climate Change, and th Addis Ababa Action Agenda, we have sent a
powerful message that there is hope for a brighter future.
However, to succeed in our endeavours, we need to mobilize all partners
to work together. This way we can chieve social progress, protect the
environm nt, create economic growth an build a more just, stable and
peac ful world.
Runaway climate change is one of the most serious threats that w
regularly witness - from heat waves and forest fires, no longer contained
to California or M diterran an, but also in places such as Scandinavia

to historic typhoons in Japan or in the Philippines, and the melting of ice
sheets on the Planet s poles.
No country can shield itself from the negative ffect of climate change.
Croatia is no exception to that. With over one thousand islands, islets
and reefs and a rich history of Mediterranean h ritage, implementing
goals of the 2030 Agenda now is crucial for Croatia s future.
All over the world, Croatia included, we are recording changes in sea
temperature and have witnessed unprecedented and irreversible
changes in ecosystems. In Croatia's beautiful Adriatic Sea, one of the
cleanest In the world, we have already registered more than 20 new
6

species of tropical fish, some of them extremely invasive that can
irreparably shif the environmental balance.
Soon we may be exposed to th danger of rising sea levels, which is
already a question of exist nce for many small islands around the world.
It is estimated that the sea level irtthe' Adriatic-will rise by almost half a
meter y 2100; ub'merging' arts' pf world.- heritage places and treasures
like Split, Trogir or Dubrovnik. ThisAs hy climate action is not an
abstract issue, but a serio s mat er r quiring our constant and undivided
attention.

One of the most important climate action and sustainable development
issues for Croatia is rev rsing demographic trends on our isl nds. They
are turning into places where schools are without children, and churches
record funerals rather than baptisms and weddings.
And yet, the problems that many of these islands face are common
globally. We ne d to improve affordable transportation and connections
between the islands and the mainland. We need to resolv water supply
and provide dean water and sanitation. We need to invest in education,
technology, science and innovation so that societies and families will
once gain flourish on the islands.
Blue Growth could be a solution. It is a long-term strategy to support
sustain ble growth in the marine and maritime sectors as a whole. S as
are driv rs of the economy and have great potential for innov tion and
growth, set to grow at twice the rate of the mainstream economy by
2030.
Growth is especially welcome in a number of areas, such as: sustainable
coastal tourism, new health benefits, better connectivity of islands,
sustainable blue growth and jobs, marine biotechnology, renewable
energy, managing maritime ecological threats and preserving eco¬
systems and biodiversity, but also improving safety and security in terms
of maritime traffic and cross-border maritime pollution.
7

I ;r .

?
't

One of the issues that I would like to emphasize today in particular is
marine litter, a problem of increasing concern that threatens marine life
in all the world s oceans, impacting more than 600 marine species. The
Croatian coastal areas are severely affected by poorly managed waste
from our Southern Adriatic neighbours.
-We ' ave t addres the rising probiemf of plastic pollution iir our..seas
and oceans rgently if we "want to leave a liveable world to futuregenerations. Plastic ebris - and each year around eight million tons of it
ends up in our oceans and seas - is particularly worrying because it is
resistant to environmental breakdown.
Plastic pollution does not only impact sea life, it also carries toxic
pollutants into the food chain with us humans on top of it. We can solve
this problem and we can start by educating and engaging everyone in a
conversation to rethink plastic, by challenging societ 's perception that
this indestructible substance can be treated as disposable .

Particular attention should be given to The Ocean Cleanup project in this
regard. It is designing and developing the first feasible method to rid the
world's oceans of plastic and its first mission to remove 50% of the Great
Pacific Garbage Patch in just five years started several weeks ago. In the
media they have called it Pac Man, referring to a popular old videogame.
The young man behind the invention is a brilliant scientist of Croatian
origin living in the Netherlands Bojan Slat, and he well deserves to be
given credit here today, beneath the UN logo, which clearly shows our
oceans.

My country is already actively preparing for the fulfilment of its
obligations un er the Paris Agreement
Excellencies,
This was the year of UN reforms in more ways than one; not only
through results achieved in the pivotal sectors of peace and security,
8

development and UN management but also in the transformational
nature of our mutual efforts to make our Organization fit for the 21st

century. The world has changed profoundly since 1945 an the birth of
the UN. In our reforms it is essential that we strike the right balance
between the maintenance of the basic framework based on the UN

Charter and.the flexibility required by new realities and conte porary
needs. In pursuing UN' 'reforms : los
Agenda.

ight of the 2030

We need a U capable of coping with unceasing ch ng s and growing
challenges in the international arena, be it n the field of regional
security, conflict management, threats to the environment, human

rights, or frontline technologies that transform profoundly the fields of
labour and disarmament ali e.

I use this opportunity to highly commend the Secretary-General and his
team for their tireless reform efforts. Ther is still a lot of work ahead of
us, but we shoul e cont nt with the results an trajectories

establishe in 2018.
Ladi s and gentlemen,
If we want to mov forward, and leave no one behind; if we truly strive
to make the UN more r levant and, in doing so, more effective, we also
nee to realize that the UN is and should e much more than just ew
York, Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi, or any conference location.

Multilateralism starts from our own homes and in our own minds. It must
not be an annual event. It needs to be our daily routine, a way of doing
business in the world.
E erything that we want to achieve globally, everything that we have
agreed so far under this dome, will be easier to accomplish with the
understanding and support of our citizens.

9

In order to face all the adversities and adversaries th t I mention in my
spe ch, both as deliver d in the more complete, written version that you
have received, we must show determination to take on the risk of
decision-making. We must open ourselves to new ideas. And we must
show emotion, empathy and, above all, enthusiasm. Enthusiasm is
contagious!

•

'

As Nelson Mandefe (fyiadf ), whose centenary e celebrated two days
ago, said, it always seems impossible until it done
Thank you.

10

