STATEMENT BY H.E. Mr. MIGUEL DIAZ-CANEL BERMUDEZ, PRESIDENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF CUBA FOR THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73° SESSION OF THE UN
GENERAL ASSEMBLY. NEW YORK, 26 SEPTEMBER 2048.
Madam President:

Mister Secretary-General:

It is impossible to be here, speak from this rostrum on behalf of Cuba, and not recall historic
moments of the General Assembly which are also part of our dearest memories: Fidel Castro,
Che Guevara, Raul Castro and the "Chancellor of Dignity", RaCil Roa, just to mention the most

significant, have brought here not only the voice of our people but also the voice of other
Latin American and Caribbean, African, Asian, non-aligned peoples, with whom we have
shared more than half a century of struggles for a fair international order, which is still far to
be attained.

It is absurd but consistent with the irrationality of a world in which the richest 0.7% of the

population owns 46% of all the wealth, while the poorer 70% of the population can access
only 2.7% of it; 3.460 billion people survive in poverty; 815 million go hungry; 758 million are
illiterate and 844 million lack basic services of drinking water. All these figures, by the way,

are prepared and regularly used by global organizations, but it seems that they have failed to
raise sufficient awareness of the so called international community.

These realities. Madam President, are not the result of socialism, like the President of the

United States said yesterday here. They are the consequence of capitalism, especially
imperialism and neoliberalism; of the selfishness and exclusion that is inherentto that system,
and of an economic, political, social and cultural paradigm that privileges wealth accumulation
in the hands of a few at the cost of the exploitation and dire poverty of the large majorities.

Capitalism consolidated colonialism. It gave birth to fascism, terrorism and apartheid and
spread wars and conflicts, the breaches of sovereignty and self-determination of the peoples;
repression on workers, minorities, refugees and migrants. Capitalism is the opposite of
solidarity and democratic participation. The production and consumption patterns that
characterize it, promote plundering, militarism, threats to peace; they generate violations of
human rights and are the greatest danger to the ecological balance of the planet and the
survival of the human being.

No one should be deceived by anybody claiming that humanity lack enough material,
financial and technological resources to eradicate poverty, hunger, preventable diseases and
other scourges. What is lacking is the political will of the industrialized countries, who have
the moral duty, the historical responsibility and the abundant resources to solve the most
pressing global problems.

The truth is that while it is claimed that there is a shortfall in funding to attain the goals and

targets of the 2030 Agenda or address the increasing impact of climate change, 1.74 triilion
dollars were wasted in military expenditure in the year 2017, the highestfigure since the end
of the Cold War.

Climate change is anotherunavoidable reality and a matter ofsurvival for the human species,
particularly for Small Island Developing States. Some of its effects are already irreversible.
Scientific evidence indicates there is an increase of 1.1° C relative to pre-industrial levels,

and that 9 out of 10 persons living in urban areas breath polluted air. •

However, the United States, one of the major polluters of yesteryear and today, refuses to
accompany the international community in the implementation of the Paris Agreement on

climate change. It thus endangers the lives of future generations and the survival of all
species, including humans.

In addition, and like there were not enough threats on humanity and its dazzling creations, it
is a fact that the military and nuclear hegemonism of imperialism is perpetuating itself and

expanding to the detriment ofthe hopes of the majority ofpeoples for a general and complete
disarmament. Cuba shares this ideal and, as testament of its commitment with this goal, on

last 31 January, it became the fifth State to ratify the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons.

In this organization that was born out of the human desire to overcome the destruction left by
a terrible war with the dialogue between nations, it is not possible to keep quiet about the
danger looming over all of us, with the exacerbation of local conflicts, wars of aggression
disguised as "humanitarian interventions", the forceful overthrow of sovereign governments,
the so-called "soft coups" and interference in other States' internal affairs, recurrent forms of
action by some powers, using the most diverse excuses.

The international cooperation for the promotion and protection of all human rights for all is a
must. However, its discriminatory and selective manipulation with claims of domination,
violatesthe rights to peace, self-determination and development ofthe peoples.

Cuba rejects the militarization of outer space and cyberspace, as well as thecovert and illegal
use of the information and communication technologies to attack other states.

The exercise of multilateralism and full respect for the principles and rules of International

Law to advancetowards a multipolar, democratic and equitable world, are required in order to

ensure peaceful coexistence, preserve international peace and security and find lasting
solutions for systemic problems.

Against that logic, the threat or use of force, unilateralism, pressures, retaliations and
sanctions which increasingly characterize the behavior and rhetoric of the US government
and its abusive use ofthe veto power in the Security Council in order to impose their political

agenda, pose huge challenges and threats within the United Nations itself.

Why don't we just implement the promised strengthening of the General Assembly as the
main organ of deliberation, decision and representation. The reform of the Security Council
must not be delayed or prevented, as this organ is in need of adjusting to the times by
democratizing its membership and working methods.

Today we have come to reiterate what Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro Ruz said on the
occasion ofthe fiftieth anniversary ofthe UN, which summarizes the most noble aspiration of

the majority of the humanity, and Iquote: "We want a world without hegemonistic practices,
without nuclear weapons, without interventionism, without racism, without national orreligious
hatred, without violations of the sovereignty of any country, with respect for independence
and the free self-determination of peoples, without universal models that do not take into
account the traditions and cultures of all components of humanity at all. without cruel
blockades that kill men, women, children, the young, and the elderly like silent atomic
bombs".

More than 20 years have elapsed since that demand was made and none of those ills have
been cured; in fact, they have exacerbated. We have every right to ask why. And we have the
duty to insist on effective and equitable solutions.
Madam President:

Our America is currently the stage of persistent threats, inconsistent with the "Proclamation of
Latin America and the Caribbean as a zone of Peace", signed in Havana by the Heads of
States and Government on the occasion of the 2"*^ Summit of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, in 2014.

The current US administration has proclaimed the relevance of the Monroe Doctrine and, in a

new deployment of its imperial policy in the region, is attacking Venezuela with special
cruelty.

It is in this threatening context that we wish to reiterate our absolute support to the Bolivarian
and Chavista Revolution, the civic-military union of the Venezuelan people and its legitimate
and democratic government, led by the constitutional president Nicolas Maduros Moros. We
reject the intervention attempts and sanctions against Venezuela, aimed at suffocating her
economically and hurting the Venezuelan families.

We likewise reject the attempts at destabilizing the Nicaraguan government, a country of
peace that has made a remarkable social, economic and public safety progress in favor of its
people.

We denounce the politically-motivated imprisonment of former president Luiz Incicio Lula da
Silva, and the decision to prevent the people from voting and electing Brazil's most popular
leader to the Presidency.

We stand in solidarity with the Caribbean nations who demand legitimate reparation for the
horrible effects of slavery as well as the fair, special and differential treatment that they
deserve.

We reaffirm our historic commitment with the self-determination and independence of our
brother people of Puerto Rico.

We support Argentina's legitimate sovereignty claim over the Malvinas Islands, South
Sandwich and South Georgia Islands.

We reiterate our unrestricted support to a comprehensive, just and lasting solution for the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, on the basis of the creation of two States, allowing the Palestinian
people to exercise their right to self-determination and to have an independent and sovereign
State based upon the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We reject the
unilateral action of the United States to establish their diplomatic representation in the city of

Jerusalem, which heightens even more the tensions in the region. We condemn the
barbarities of the Israeli forces against civilian population in Gaza.

We reaffirm our steadfast solidarity with the Saharan people, and support the search for a
final solution to the question of Western Sahara, which will allow the exercise of selfdetermination and to live in peace in their territory.

We support the search for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the situation imposed in
Syria, without foreign interference and with full respect to their sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We reject any direct or indirect intervention, carried out without the legitimate
authorities of the country.

The continued expansion of NATO towards Russian border is causing serious threats,
worsened by the imposition of arbitrary sanctions, which we reject.
We demand compliance with the Islamic Republic of Iran's nuclear deal.
We welcome the process of rapprochement and dialogue among the Koreas. This is the way
to achieve a lasting peace, reconciliation and stability in the Korean peninsula. At the same
time, we strongly condemn the imposition of unilateral and unfair sanctions against the
DemocraticPeople's Republic of Korea and foreign interference in Korean internal affairs.
The violations of the rules of international trade and the sanctions against China, the

European Union and other countries will bring about harmful effects, particularly for
developing States.

We favor dialogue and cooperation, thanks to which we can report today that the Cuba-EU
Agreement on Political Dialogue and Cooperation has provisionally entered into force and is a
goodfoundation to develop beneficial ties between the Parties.
Madam President:

The government ofthe US keeps an aggressive rhetoric towards Cuba and maintains a policy
aimed at subverting the political, economic, social, economic and cultural system in my

country. Contrary to the interests of both peoples and giving in to the pressures of minority
sectors, the new US government has devoted itself to artificially fabricate under false
pretexts, scenarios of tension and hostility serve nobody's interests.
This is in contrast with the fact that we have formal diplomatic relations and mutually

beneficial cooperation programs in a limited number of areas.

Our peoples share increasingly closer historic and cultural bonds, which are expressed in the
arts, sports, science, the environment, among others. The potential for a fluent business
relationship is well known and a genuine and respectful understanding would be in the
interest of the entire region.

However, the essential and defining element of the bilateral relationship continues to be the
blockade, which seeks to suffocate the Cuban economy in order to generate hardships and
disrupt the constitutional order. It is a cruel policy, punishing Cuban families and the entire
Nation.

It is the most comprehensive and long-standing system of economic sanctions ever
implemented against any country. It has been and continues to be a major obstacle to the

country's development and to the realization of the aspirations to progress and well-being of
several generations of Cubans.

As has been said for so many years in this same place, due to its aggressive extraterritorial
implementation, the blockade seriously damages the sovereignty and interests of all
countries.

On behalf of the Cuban people, I would like to thank this General Assembly for the virtually
unanimous rejection to the economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed by the
United States against my country.

Nevertheless, the actions of the US government against my country go farther. It includes
public and covert programs of gross interference in Cuba's internal affairs. To this end, tens
of millions of dollars that are officially allocated in its budget are used, in violation of the
standards and principles upon which this organization rests, and in particular, of Cuba's
sovereignty as an independent nation.

Cuba stands ready to develop respectful and civilized relations with the US government on
the basis of sovereign equality and mutual respect. This is the will of the Cuban people and
we know this is a shared aspiration by most US citizens and, particularly, by Cubans living
there.

We shall continue to tirelessly demand the end of the cruel economic, commercial and
financial blockade, the return of the territory illegally occupied by the Guantanamo Naval
Base and adequate compensation to our people for the thousands of dead and disabled and
forthe economic and property damages caused to Cuba over so many years of aggression.

Cuba will always be willing to engage In dialogue and cooperate on the basis of respect and
equal footing. We shall never make concessions affecting the sovereignty and national
independence, we shall not negotiate our principles nor shall we accept conditionalities.
In spite of the blockade, the hostility and the actions carried out by the United States to
impose a regime change in Cuba, the Cuban Revolution is right here, alive and strong,
faithful to her principles!
Madam President:

The generational change in our government should not raise the hopes of the enemies ofthe
Revolution. We are the continuity, not a rupture. Cuba has continued taking steps to improve
its model of economic and social development in order to build a sovereign, independent.

socialist, democratic, prosperous and sustainable Nations. This is the path that our people
has freely chosen.

The country will not go back to the opprobrious past that it shook off with the greatest
sacrifices during 150 years of struggle for independence and full dignity. By the decision of
the overwhelming majority of Cubans, we shall continue the work that started almost 60 years
ago.

In this conviction, we began a constitutional reform process, a truly participatory and
democratic exercise, through popular discussion of the draft which will eventually be

approved in a referendum. I am certain that there will be no changes in our strategic
objectives and that the irrevocable nature of socialism will be ratified.

The principles of foreign policy will remain unchanged. As the First Secretary of our Party,
Raul Castro Ruz, said on his statement on the occasion of the 70 anniversary of the United

Nations, and Iquote: "the international community will always be able to count on the Cuba's
sincere voice against injustice, inequality, underdevelopment, discrimination and
manipulation; and for the establishment of a fairer and more equitable international order,
whose center is placed, really on the human being, its dignity and wellbeing".
The Cuba on behalf of which I speak today is the proud successor of that independent,

sovereign, fraternal and solidarity policy with the poorest of this world, producers of all the
wealth in the planet, although the unequal global order has sentenced them with dire poverty
on behalf of words like democracy, freedom and human rights, words which the rich have
actually emptied of meaning.

It has been exciting and pleasant to take the floor at the same rostrum from which Fidel

expressed powerful truths 58 years ago. that still continue to shake us in front of
representatives of more than 190 nations who, rejecting extortion and pressures, every year
fill the voting screen of worthy green lights of approval to our demand for the end of the
blockade.

I bid you farewell in the hope that the noble aspirations of most of the Humanity will be
achieved before younger generations take this rostrum to demand the same as we do today
and our historic predecessors did in yesteryear.
Thank you very much.

