STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS
MR. NICOS ANASTASIADES
T THE GENER L DEB TE OF THE 73rd SESSION OF THE

GENERAL SSEMBLY OF THE U ITED TIO S

Mr. President,
Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

At the outset, let me congratulate the newly elected President of this
session, Mrs. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces, and assure of my
Government s unwavering support to her mission.

I would like also to pay tribute to the memory of the recently
deceased former UN Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who, with

his charismatic and measured approach, redefined the United
Nations and actively championed the ideals which characterized his
ethos: peace-making and peace-keeping, international co-operation
and sustainable development.

Also, in honouring the centenary of the birth of the great statesman
and world leader, Nelson Mandela, we express our great admiration

and gratitude for his active promotion of the noble values of peace,
justice and equality.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Cyprus fully endorses the theme chosen for this year s session of
the General Assembly: «Global leadership and shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies)).

And we fully subscribe to it, as, of course, the majority of UN
members, since the theme itself in its essence reminds us of the
founding principles of the UN on which millions of people and many
countries vested their hopes for a better future.

An Organisation which emerged from the ashes of war for the
purpose of maintaining international peace and security,
underpinning the respect and promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, irrespective of gender, racial or ethnic
origin, religion or belief.

2

This order is based on multilateralism, collective action and
international co-operation among states having sovereign equality.

However, one might contemplate if we have failed to uphold the said
values, by wondering:

How is it then that we come back again and again, year after year, as

a kind of ritual, to attest to the dismal lack of effectiveness for some
and the embellishment attempt for others, for what is in fact our

inability to fulfil the aims of the UN Charter?

Why do the decisions of the Security Council remain in their
overwhelming majority sheer certificates attesting violations?

Why is international law and international agreements not
implemented?

Why do strategies and programmes aiming at creating better
conditions for people that are suffering, remain wishful thinking?

3

When will we finally really take our destiny into our own hands, fully
assuming our responsibilities towards our peoples and towards
humanity as a whole?

Ladies and Gentlemen,

As a leader of a small country, which suffers for more than 44 (fourty-

four) years by the blatant violations of International law, let me repeat
the well-known causes which explain all these unacceptable and
disappointing results, registered both at the regional and global
level.

I would dare mention sad realities candidly, but honestly, in order for
States and International Organisations to consider readjusting their
policies and actions with a view of upholding real hope for a better
future.

In this effort, in this struggle, we must ensure the cooperation of all,
but more so of the states and the peoples that are the victims, those
suffering from phenomena such as:

(i) The primacy of expansionist interests of a state against the
territorial integrity, peace and prosperity of other countries and
peoples;

(ii) The investments and promotion of the military industry and
infrastructure, through the fomentation of conflict in order to secure

their own profitability;

(iii) The passive observance of violations of international law,
such as the annexation of territories, fuelling separatism and civil
wars, in order not to poison relations and common interests

between friendly countries;

(iv) Financing and promoting of terrorism by some states, in
order to impose religious fundamentalism;

(v) While more than 20 (twenty) million people in north-eastern
Nigeria, South Sudan, Yemen and Somalia face famine and are in

need of urgent assistance, whereas more than 820 (eight-hundred)
million people, including 155 (one hundred and fifty-five) million
children suffer from chronic malnutrition, there are countries in

which immense quantities of animal and plant products are
destroyed for the sake of narrow and blind economic and
commercial considerations.

(vi) While child mortality and life - threatening diseases
persevere and health services provided are below acceptable

levels, we continue to face inflexible policies and practices,
emasculating competent authorities from providing the necessary
medical care.

(vii) Instead of facing the root causes leading to massive
migratory flows of millions of people, we contend ourselves in
setting up immigration detention centres.

6

(viii) While we adopt the Paris Agreement to address the global
challenge of climate change, specific interests hinder either the
design or the implementation of domestic policies which would
deliver on our pledge and commitments.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

All the above, in addition to the inability to effectively implement the
resolutions of the UN, have led to unprecedented crises and have
resulted in a lack of credibility, trust and even legitimacy of our
decisions, bringing about:
• Forcible displacement of millions of people;
• Hunger and distress which intensify migration flows, create
demographic changes and exert huge economic and social
pressures to all countries or regions affected;
• Human and drug trafficking; and,
• Destruction of cultural heritage.

7

Distinguished Friends,

Despite diverging aspirations or conflicting interests, we should rise
to meet our shared responsibility, reverse our policies of the political
expediencies which I have referred to, adopt a more proactive,
targeted and results-oriented approach and address the root causes

that have led to this unprecedented situation.

We should intensify our efforts towards making sustainable
development finally a reality for all countries and regions in need,
through establishing the necessary political and socio-economic
conditions which would lead to stability, economic growth and
institution building.

At the same time, we should also efficiently confront the threats
posed by ongoing conflicts in order to achieve lasting and viable
political solutions that will promote regional peace, security and
predictability and save future generations from the plague of
asymmetric threats.

Collective leadership and the primacy of multilateralism is the only
way forward to effectively eliminate threats to peace and security.
8

Therefore, we need to strengthen our support and commitment to the

UN and safeguard the effective implementation of its decisions, as
well as its actions, on the basis of justice and international law, which
constitute the core and essence of this Organization.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is in this context that we lend our unwavering support to the
ambitious vision of the Secretary General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, to
reform the Organization, in a manner that corresponds to the needs
of its member states and meets the expectations of our peoples.

With regard to the reform of the Development pillar, we reiterate our
full commitment to strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
to become more effective and transparent, in pursuance of the

implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

An agenda which forms an integral part of our efforts to help all
people live in dignity.

9

In parallel, further action needs to be undertaken to address the
vulnerability of states to climate change, in particular small island
states, while we also need to put more emphasis and accelerate

efforts to implement the Sustainable Development Goals.

Bearing in mind the ongoing unstable situation and conflicts in Syria,
Iraq, Yemen, Libya, Nigeria, Myanmar, Afghanistan, the Sahel, the
long-standing Israeli - Palestinian conflict and, of course, the still

unresolved problem of the forcible division of my country, we should
attach particular importance to the peace and security pillar reform.

We fully concur with the notion of the primacy of diplomacy in peace¬
making and conflict-resolution and the supportive, yet catalytic, role
of peace-keeping operations therein.

We ought to admit, however, that the former is jeopardized without
the latter and that in the absence of a negotiating process, the need
for peace-keeping becomes much greater and indispensable.

The situation in my country offers a meaningful example in this
regard.

10

Therefore, while we remain deeply committed to adopting necessary
reforms in this pillar, we strongly believe that each peace-keeping
operation should be evaluated on its own merit, based on actual
needs and threats on the ground.

The risks involved are far too grave to allow for any experimentations
in this regard.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

My country, albeit being a member of the European Union, is
however located at the epicenter of an area of extreme volatility and
instability.

Our quest is based in our vision and ambition to be a beacon of
stability, predictability and creating synergies in promoting shared
prosperity and stability for all.

11

To this end, and being accepted by all as an honest broker with no
hidden agenda, we have reinforced our historic close ties with the
countries of our immediate region and, alongside Greece, we have

established trilateral partnerships with neighboring countries,
including Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan and Palestine.

These trilateral mechanisms constitute a fitting example of what can
be achieved when countries with shared concerns and common
interests join powers, instead of isolating themselves.

In short, these trilateral partnerships are a practical expression of
effective multilateralism, fully in line with the theme of the UN:
«Shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies».

As such, they are neither exclusive, nor directed against any third
country. On the contrary, they institutionalize co-operation and

dialogue in our region, particularly in areas in which there are
comparative advantages, as for example, in the field of energy.

12

In this regard, we warmly welcome the expansion of these trilateral
formats to include additional partners in specific fields of mutually
beneficial collaborations.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

When talking about the importance of achieving peace and stability
in our immediate neighborhood and the means through which it
can be accomplished, I feel obliged to stress the significance and
the consequent multiple benefits that would arise by reaching a
comprehensive solution of the Cyprus problem.

First and foremost, a viable and lasting settlement would be to the
best interest of the people of Cyprus, Greek and Turkish Cypriots,
and their aspiration to live in a normal and prosperous European
country, fully independent and free from any foreign
dependencies.

At the same time, I remain convinced that the solution of the
Cyprus problem will undoubtedly have a very important collateral
influence on achieving and maintaining a much-needed

environment of stability and peace in the region.
13

Last, but not least, the solution of an international problem which
has been on the agenda of the United Nations in the last decades,
will offer a beacon of hope that even the most intractable problems
can be solved peacefully through the United Nations.

Unfortunately, as the peace process remains at an impasse since

the Conference on Cyprus of July 2017, I am deeply concerned
about the lapse of time and its consequences.

Dear Friends,

Let me be clear: Only a viable and functional solution, in line with
our EU membership and the best practices of democratic countries
of the UN, can establish the conditions for achieving lasting peace,
allowing my country to fully take its stride and for all Cypriots to
live in a normal state and work together for the prosperity and
security of all.

14

As I have repeatedly stated: I remain strongly and truly committed
to achieve a solution on the basis of the relevant UN resolutions
and the European Union acquis, continuing the negotiations on the
six-point framework that the UN Secretary - General has set as the
basis for the way forward.

The UN Secretary - General and His Good Offices Mission is the
only way forward.

We expect Turkey, which has a key role in the efforts to reach a
settlement, to rise to the occasion and demonstrate the necessary

political determination to reach a settlement and concretely
contribute to regional stability.

On our own behalf, I wish once more to repeat that we are
determined to rise to the challenge of our historic responsibility
and do our utmost so as to provide a peaceful future for all Cypriots
and the region.

15

Mr. President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

In a fragmented and multipolar world, we have more than ever the

moral, ethical and political duty to promote the essence of human
civilization, unite our strength to maintain international peace and
security and establish the conditions which would bring prosperity
and welfare for all.

This is exactly the theme of this year s session and I do hope that
by next year we would be in a position to proud ourselves that
significant steps towards materializing this vision have been taken.

Thank You.

16

