"Making the United Nations relevant to all people: global leadership and shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies"
Ms President,

Let me first congratulate you on your election as President of the 73rd session of the United
Nations General Assembly.
Ms President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

One himdred years since the end of the First World War we find ourselves in the World,
where - despite all our efforts - lasting peace has not yet been universally secured and where
people are still dying in violent conflicts. The UN's raison d'etre is the protection of peace,
human rights, justice and social progress. These values are not a Western instrument; they
form universal ideals for whose accomplishment should all of us, the Member States, strive
together.
We face many challenges to dignity of individuals, global prosperity, and sustainable
development, including gender inequaUty, youth unemployment, global health threats, climate
change, violent extremism, terrorism, forced displacement, or uncontrolled migration.
Furthermore, multilateralism and the rules based system which benefit everyone and which
have long held many of these threats at bay are being increasingly undermined and
questioned. One way of how we, as policymakers, can tackle these challenges is realization
of the difficult structural and political reforms of the UN - to promote shared global
responsibility, robust international cooperation, and regaining common values.
We all understand the need to reform the UN Security Council to reflect the realities of
today's world. Unfortunately, in recent years the UN Security Council has been
characterized by blocking tactics rather than cooperation. Its failure to act on the world's
worst atrocities is tangible in several ongoing brutal conflicts, fi-om Syria to Yemen.
Secretary-General Antdnio Guterres has already embarked on the challenging endeavour
to reform the UN. The Czech Repubhc fully supports his efforts. Making the United Nations
more effective through much needed reforms in the areas of peace and security, management
and development system would truly make the UN relevant to all people and help promote
peaceful, equitable and sustainable world. As such, we have to endorse the SecretaryGeneral's work and give his proposals, including their budgetary and financial implications,
the strongest possible support.

The vital point of the Secretary-General's reform agenda is its focus on prevention of
conflicts. All of us should tirelessly work to ensure crises are contained before they break out
and that post-conflict countries are stabilized in the long term. For an effective prevention, we
should adopt a comprehensive approach to peace and security, which treats the climate
change as a security problem, while advancing sustainable development and promoting
human rights.
The Czech Republic took great pride in having had the honour to hold the one-year
Presidency of ECOSOC in 2017-2018. Allow me to thank you all, the Member States as well
as the Secretariat, for excellent cooperation. It was an enlightening experience indeed not only
for our Presidency team, but also for our entire administration.

In the context of Sustainable Development Goals, which are the foundation of our
concentrated efforts in promoting sustainable development, the Czech Republic will continue
to champion SDG 16, not only as a follow up of omi ECOSOC Presidency, but mainly as a
cornerstone of the 2030 Agenda. We consider peace, justice and functioning institutions our
priority and a solid base on which a sustainable future for everyone can be built. In the
context of sustainable development, it is also crucial that the United Nations seek more
synergies between its humanitarian, development and security activities. Apart from
conflict prevention, special focus should be put on post-conflict stabilization. Those efforts
should be visible in the field. To achieve this goal, more cooperation among the UN agencies
is required, as well as broader coordination with and between the UN Member States.

History teaches us that respect for human rights is the best remedy for conflict and violence.
Efforts towards realization of human rights for all are the best investment in our peaceful and
prosperous future. Lasting peace and sustainable development cannot be achieved when
human rights are abused and violated. And yet, the human rights pillar of the United
Nations is chronically under-funded and often overlooked. This must change.
The UN has developed unique tools and fora to promote the realization of human rights. We,
the Member States, should take full advantage of the UN human rights expertise and fully
honour the human rights obligations we have taken. Today as ever, independent and impartial
voices speaking up for hiunan rights are indispensable. One such voice has always been the
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the outgoing High Commissioner Zeid Raad A1 Hussein for his excellent job in the
office and to wish all the success to his successor Michelle Bachelet.

Human rights are deeply rooted in the historical experience of my country. The promotion of
human rights - both in bilateral contacts and on the global scene - remains our long-term
foreign policy priority. The Czech Republic is currently running for a seat on the UN
Human Rights CouncU for the term 2019-2021; this candidature has been endorsed by the
Eastern European Group of States. I can assure you that as a Council member, the Czech
Republic will spare no effort to contribute to a better enjoyment of human rights for all,
everywhere. We stand ready to collaborate in a transparent manner and in good will with all
States in all geographical regions as well as with civil society. Today, here at the General
Assembly, I wish to ask you all for your valuable support in several weeks' time at the
election to the Human Rights Coimcil.
-

pause -

Our efforts to prevent conflicts and instability would not be complete without mentioning
denuclearization and fight against terrorism. The Czech Republic, having its Embassy in
Pyongyang, is deeplyinterested in improving the situation on the Korean Peninsula. This is
why we are following with high expectations both the Inter-Korean and US-DPRK dialogue
at the highest level. The complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula is the only way how to achieve long-lasting peace, security and prosperity on the
Korean Peninsula. We need a resolute and coordinated approach in coimtering proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction as we do in fighting terrorism. Although ISIL has been
defeated in large territories in Syria and Iraq, we are aware that it is still active and that there
are also other terrorist organizations operating worldwide. It is necessaryto take further steps
in the area of international law and finally conclude the comprehensive convention on

international terrorism as mentioned by President Zeman at this gathering in 2016. We call
for an internationally recognized definition of terrorism which will enhance the criminal
responsibility of terrorists worldwide and enable us to hold them accountable.
This year the Czech Republic commemorates 50 years since the Warsaw Pact troops
invaded Czechoslovakia. The experience of the '68 invasion still resonates strongly not only
in the Czech Republic, as the moment where many lost faith in the promises of the better
world preached by the SovietUnion. This seemingly historical event however carries lessons
still relevant today and echoes in incidents which are still occurring in the World around us:
Firstly, it is still not a given that all countries including those situated in Eastern Europe
have the right to choose their foreign policy orientation without their sovereignty and
territorial integrity threatened. In this context, I would like to recall once more that the
annexation of Crimea represents a blatant violation of the intemational law.

Secondly, it should not be forgotten that the use of force is allowed under the UN Charter
only in self-defence and on the basis of Chapter VII decision of the UN Security Council.
The UN is the sole guarantor of intemational peace and security. It is only through collective
means and within the mles-based intemational order that peace and security of all our nations
can be achieved.

Thirdly, in cases when States and the intemational community fail in their shared
responsibility for the protection of people from atrocities, it is imperative to establish
accountability for serious violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights. As such, the Czech Republic firmly supports intemational criminal justice and, in
particular, the International Criminal Court. We welcome the activation of the ICC's
jurisdiction over the crime of aggression which we consider to be one of the checks for nonrepetition of this crime in the future.

In certain cases, however, ICC's jurisdiction is absent. This should not be seen as a loophole
for perpetrators of atrocities, as a way to escape accountability. For crimes committed in
Syria, we are supporting, both politically and by financial contribution, the so called "Triple I
Mechanism" - Intemational, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
Intemational Law Committed in Syria since March 2011. The accountability is not only a way
to bring justice to those suffering in conflicts, it is also a path towards reconciliation and a
cmcial means to prevent atrocities from reoccurring.
Ladies and gentlemen, while newly independent Czech Republic was admitted to the United
Nations 25 years ago, in 1993, this year we also celebrate the centennial of our modem
statehood and independence, as Czechoslovakia was bom in the cmcible of the First World
War in 1918. The founder and first President of my coimtry, TomdS Garrigue Masaryk, rightly
posited that states are sustained only by those ideals from which they were bom. The same
must be tme about the United Nations. We should therefore strive to reinvigorate the founding

ideals of this noble organization —only thus can we succeed in fulfilling the topic of its 73"^
session, making it really relevant and helpful to all people.
Thank you for your kind attention.

