Democratic People's Republic of Korea
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
820 Second Avenue, 13th Floor, New York, N.Y 10017
Tel: (212)972-3105/3106 Fax:(212)972-3154

Check against delivery

Statement by H.E.RI Yong Ho,Minister for Foreign Affairs ofthe
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea at the General Debate ofthe 73rd Session
ofthe General Assembly ofthe United Nations
(29 September 2018,New York)
Madam President,

First of all, allow me to congratulate Your Excellency Maria Fernanda ESPINOSA
GARCES on your election as the President of the
session of the UN General Assembly.
1 look forward to successful outcome of the UNGA under your able stewardship.
Madam President,

Peace and development is a common desire of our times and it constitutes the main
objective of the UN defining all its activities. Many countries around the world concentrate
their efforts on achieving peace and development but such efforts are still faced with
serious challenges.

During the past 1 year we have been witnessing the overall international relations
becoming tense with peace being threatened and development being deterred in many
parts of the world due to the power-does-it-all attitude of unilateralism and such a situation
requires even more enhanced role of the UN.
It is the Korean peninsula, where the most tangible trend of peace and development
was newly created this year.

In April this year. Comrade Kim Jong Un, the chairman of the State Affairs Commission
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) put forward a new strategic line of
concentrating all efforts on the socialist economic construction.

Since we have sufficiently consolidated national defense capabilities and war
deterrence to cope with the nuclear threats against the DPRK that have been lasting over
several decades, concentrating all efforts on economic construction has come up to us as a
historic task.

The DPRK government's policy line of focusing on the economy requires peaceful
environment above an3^hing else.

Comrade Chairman Kim Jong Un conducted energetic summit-level diplomatic
activities with a firm determination to turn the Korean peninsula into a land of peace free of
both nuclear weapons and nuclear threats; and made an important breakthrough in
improving the North-South relations and the DPRK-U.S. relations and in revitalizing the
friendly and cooperative relations with neighboring countries and thus made a turning
point for dramatic easing oftension in the Korean peninsula.
As much as we have achieved in easing of tension in the Korean peninsula and its

region, the peace and security of the region will be consolidated and this will lead to the
world peace and security, to the benefits of all the member states of the UN in other words.
The fact that representatives of numerous countries have been unanimous in
supporting and welcoming the current direction of the developments in the Korean
peninsula at this platform clearly shows that the DPRK government's strategic choice and
its sincere efforts to pursue that choice fully concur with the common interest and desire of
the international community.
Madam President,

The key to consolidating the peace and security in the Korean peninsula is to
thoroughly implement the DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement adopted in June at the historic
DPRK-U.S.summit in Singapore.

The DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement contains all principled issues regarding eventual
solutions of the issues in the Korean peninsula such as terminating decades-long hostility
between the two countries and establishing new DPRK-U.S. relations, building solid peace
regime on the Korean Peninsula, realizing complete denuclearization of the Korean
Peninsula and humanitarian work between the two countries.

Once the DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement is implemented, the current trend towards detente
will turn into durable peace and the complete denuclearization of the Korean peninsula will
also be achieved and the Korean peninsula, the hottest spot in the globe, will become the
cradle of peace and prosperity that contributes to security in Asia and the rest of the world.
The DPRK government's commitment to thorough implementation of the DPRK-U.S.
Joint Statement is unwavering.

The primary task for effectively implementing the DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement should be
bringing down the barrier of mistrust between the two countries which has existed for
several decades; and to this end, the DPRK and the U.S. should spend many efforts to
building trust above all.

All the past process for the implementation of previous agreements from various
dialogues and negotiations between the DPRK and the U.S. ended in failure because the
mistrust between the two was not sufficiently removed resulting in lack of confidence.

It is our position that the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula should also be
realized along with building peace regime under the principle of simultaneous actions, step
by step,starting with what we can do and giving priority to trust-building.
Out of the desire and resolute determination to successfully implement the DPRK-U.S.

Joint Statement, the DPRK government gives particular attention to trust-building and is
pouring primary efforts to this.

Even before the DPRK-U.S. summit, the DPRK government took significant good-will
measures such as stopping nuclear and ICBM tests, dismantling the nuclear test site in a

transparent manner and affirming not to transfer nuclear weapons and nuclear technology
under any circumstances and it continues to put in efforts to trust-building.
However, we do not see any corresponding response from the U.S.

On the contrary, instead of addressing our concern for the absence of peace regime in

the Korean peninsula, the U.S. insists on the "denuclearization-first" and increases the level
of pressure by sanctions to achieve their purpose in a coercive manner, and even objecting
the "declaration of the end of war".

The perception that sanctions can bring us on our knees is a pipe-dream of the people
who are ignorant about us. But the problem is that the continued sanctions are deepening
our mistrust.

The reason behind the recent deadlock is because the U.S. relies on coercive methods
which are lethal to trust-building.

The recent dramatic improvement of the North-South relations and the atmosphere of
cooperation clearly show how decisive the role of trust-building can be.
In less than 5 months, the leaders of the North and the South met 3 times and through

their meetings and talks they have been building trust in each other enough for solving the
various issues in the North-South relations in a constructive manner and the tangible
results are shown in reality.

As demonstrated by the "September Pyongyang joint Declaration" that was jointly
announced by the leaders of the North and the South on September 19, this year the
dialogues between the North and South in many areas including the fields of politics,
military, humanitarian work, sports, culture and economic cooperation are very active and
atmosphere of reconciliation and cooperation has been high like never before and many
noteworthy outcomes are being made one after another enjoying the support and welcome
by the entire Korean nation and the international community.

If the party to this issue of denuclearization were south Korea and not the U.S., the
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula would not have come to such a deadlock.

This is why we give great importance to building confidence between the DPRK and the
U.S. for the implementation ofthe Joint Statement. Without any trust in the U.S. there will be
no confidence in our national security and under such circumstances there is no way we
will unilaterally disarm ourselves first.

The DPRK government's commitment to the denuclearization is solid and firm.
However,it is only possible if the U.S. secures our sufficient trust towards the U.S.
Madam President,

There are pessimistic views towards the implementation of the DPRK-U.S. Joint
Statement inside the U.S., and that is not because there is any flaw in the Joint Statement but
because of the U.S. domestic politics.
Those in the political opposition in the U.S. make it their daily business to slander the
DPRK claiming that we cannot be trusted with the sole purpose of attacking their political
opponent and they are enforcing the administration to make unreasonable unilateral
demand to our side thereby impeding the smooth progress of the dialogue and negotiations.
Creating mistrust towards the dialogue partner while only relying on coercive method

is not helpful at all in building trust; on the contrary it only increases mistrust. Talking
about reasons for distrusting each other, we have far more reasons to distrust the U.S.
The U.S. possessed nuclear weapons earlier than we did and the U.S. is the only country
that actually used them in real war.

From the very first day of our Republic 70 years ago the U.S. has exercised hostile policy
against our country and put complete economic blockade against our country making sure
that the U.S. enterprises cannot even trade a single screw nail with our country.

We did not even throw a pebble stone at the U.S. soil but during the Korean War the U.S.
threatened to drop tens of atomic bombs in our country, and even after that the U.S. kept
bringing in strategic nuclear arsenals at our door steps. If the both countries harbor
mistrust towards each other, being obsessed with the past, then the recent DPRK-U.S. Joint
Statement cannot escape the same fate of failure as all the previous agreements between
the two countries.

One part of the spirit of the DPRK-U.S. summit in Singapore is to free ourselves of old
conventional way and trying a completely new way of solving the issues.

At this critical juncture, the U.S. should make a foresighted judgment that faithful
fulfillment of the commitment it made in Singapore will, in the end, be in the best national
interest of the U.S. and should maintain new method for solving the DPRK-U.S. relations.
Only then there will be a positive prospect for the DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement.

If the DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement becomes a victim of the domestic politics of the U.S.,

then the greatest victim of the subsequent unpredictable consequences will be the U.S. itself
as a whole.

Solving the DPRK-U.S. relations and issues in the Korean peninsula is the key topic in
achieving theme of this session: "Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global
leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies".
Our new policy line of concentrating all efforts on the economic construction is the
right political choice not only in improving our people's life but also in realizing the
common desire of the people around the world aspiring after peace and development.
The international society should support and encourage our efforts to focus on the
economic construction in response to the bold decisions and good-will measures we have
taken for the easing of tension and maintaining durable peace in the Korean peninsula.
The implementation of the DPRK-U.S. Joint Statement is a shared responsibility of the
DPRK and the U.S.; at the same time the UN also has a role to play in it. The UN Security
Council that was once so eager to express "concern" to the tense situation in the Korean

peninsula keeps silence even now about the precious momentum for peace in the Korean
peninsula which has been achieved this year; this cannot be said as normal in any way.
The UNSC poured down on us numerous "sanctions resolutions" making issue of our
nuclear tests and rocket test launches. But even today, when one whole year has passed

since such tests have been stopped, even a word in those "resolutions" remains unchanged
to say nothing about being totally removed or eased.
Worse still, the UNSC is taking very concerning stand by rejecting the proposal by some
of its member states to issue presidential statement that welcomes the DPRK-U.S. summit
and the Joint Statement.

The "UN Command" in south Korea even showed alarming signs of hindering the

implementation of the Panmunjom Declaration between the north and south.
As for the "UN Command",it is merely a "command of allied forces" beyond the control
of the UN that only obeys the orders of the U.S., but the problem is that it is still misusing
the sacred name of the UN.

Based on the mission of the UN as defined in the UN Charter, the UN and especially the

UNSC have the responsibility and duty to support and welcome the developments that are
helpful in ensuring international peace and security.
The UN should really apply the theme of this session: "Making the United Nations

relevant to all people: Global leadership and shared responsibilities" to its actual activities
and hence get rid of the stigma that"UNSC equals U.S." as early as possible.
Thank you.

