Commonwealth of Domi ica

Address by

HON. FRANCINE BARON
Minister for Foreign and CARICOM Affairs of the
Commonwealth of Dominica

On the occasion of the

73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly

September 29, 2018
United Nations, New York

i

Secretary General of the United Nations,
President of the General Assembly
Distinguished Heads of Delegations,
Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen:

Madam President, I congratulate you on your appointment and my
delegation extends best wishes to you for a productive tenure, as

you seek to direct the affairs of this important institution, in the
interest of humanity.

Madam President:
There are few moments in the history of a nation, that captures the
resilience, fortitude and strength of its people. For us that moment
came on September 18, last year, when Hurricane Maria unleashed

its fury of 180 miles per-hour winds that, brought Dominica to its
knees.

Immediately after the raging winds and the torrential down pours
subsided, our people, raised their battered and wounded selves and
began the daunting task of search and rescue, clearing roadways

and quickly moved thereafter into a rebuilding mode.
Madam President:
I am proud to stand here, one year later, representing a people who

have fought against adversity from that day, to attain some form of
normalcy in their lives.
I am proud to be representing students who spent months away
from classrooms, who endured the inconvenience of no electricity

no internet and the disruption of living in shelters, but who attained
some of the highest scores, on the recently concluded Caribbean
secondary school examinations.
2

I am proud to stand here representing farmers, who have gone back

to their fields and are now harvesting fresh produce to feed our
people and for export.

I applaud Dominicans far and wide for being part of the relief
efforts and the rebuilding process, but I salute in particular those at
home, who walked for miles every day, up, down, and across the
island, to be of service. Who worked countless hours to save lives,

to provide essential services and to deliver vital supplies to those in
need.

Hurricane Maria wreaked havoc on Dominica, but the world must

be told of the strength of Dominicans, our tenacity and our
determination as a people.

The efforts of our people were keenly matched by the outpouring
of support that we received from members of this UN family. From
our brothers and sisters in the Caribbean region, to our
international partners and friends. Ordinary men and women across

the globe reached out to us, to lend a helping hand. As we speak
scores of volunteers are on the ground, helping with the rebuilding
efforts.

The tremendous support that we have received from regional
response agencies and international organisations, both within and
outside the UN system, and institutions like the World Bank, all of
these efforts have contributed significantly to the progress that we
have made thus far.
We cannot on this occasion single out those many persons,
countries and organisations, that reached out to us, but the people

of Dominica are eternally grateful, to all of you for standing with
us in our darkest hour. Thank you all.

3

Madam President,

A few days following the passage of Hurricane Maria, our Prime
Minister, Honourable Roosevelt Skerrit, stood before this august
body and sounded a call for action. He called for the world to
wake up and take note, that the war of climate change, had come to
our shores.

He echoed a call to all countries big and small; developed and
developing, to come together to save our planet. One year later,

where are we? What have we done? What have we achieved?
Among and around us are many who still deny the reality of
climate change. We have not, as a global community, agreed upon

a plan for implementation of the commitments made in Paris at
COP21. Additionally, we have not mobilized the resources to
capitalize the 100 billion dollars per year, which was agreed upon,
to assist the most vulnerable, to adapt and mitigate against the
harmful effects of climate change.
While we have failed to live up to these commitments, arctic ice
shelves continue to melt at an alarming rate. The oceans continue
to get warmer; hurricanes and storms continue to develop and
threaten our countries, drought becomes more severe and flooding

more pronounced. Climate change is therefore the global
responsibility of our time. I do not even for a brief moment say

this lightly.
How could I, standing here, in this forum that appeals to our
universal humanity?
Madam President:
We live in a world in which too many children go hungry night
after night. A world in which light arms and small weapons
continue to infiltrate our most vulnerable societies. A world in

4

which non-communicable diseases account for so many
preventable deaths.

Yes! I agree! Poverty, inequality and violence are shared
responsibilities, too; But their modem-d y manifestations are
wrapped up in climate change.
Climate change arises from activities that support and reflect
inequalities, nd lways, it is the oor who suffer most. It is the
oor whose lands are impacted by severe droughts and flooding,
whose homes are destroyed and loved ones perish. It is the poor
who have the least capacity to escape the heavy burdens, of
poverty, disease, and death.

Madam President:
Much violence stems directly from climate-change induced
scarcity of things, like water, or productive lands. Climate change
is the main symptom of our world s broken economy, society and
humanity.

Distinguished Delegates:
This is precisely the issues for which we have assembled our
United Nations. Let this not be just another moment, to simply
sharpen the rhetoric or to speak merely of redoubling current
efforts.

We have done that too many times before - yet watched climate
change ravage on, regardless.

While we pontificate and engage in a perpetual debate, climate
change will march on, laying waste to our forests and fields,
whipping up the fury of angry winds and punishing rains, wrecking
lives and livelihoods.

5

It is no secret that the lack of motivation by some countries to take
the required actions, is rooted in this economic truth: that those
who gain most from the activities that create climate chan e,
remain the most removed from its dire consequences.
Since climate change is the result of an economic calculus, that

will keep pushing global destruction further and further along, it
must be accepted as the responsibility of our time. One we must
put our collective efforts behind to arrest.

Madam President:
It was only after Prime Minister Skeritt left this Hall last year, that
the international experts completed the post disaster needs
assessment for Dominica. Their conclusions disclosed that a single
hurricane, in a few hours, caused loss and damage equivalent to
226% of our country s GDP. A mere two years prior, a tropical

storm, had wiped out the equivalent of 90% of our GDP.
The cost of building back better, of building a resilient nation,
comes with a price tag far in excess of what small developing
states, like Dominica, are able to meet singlehandedly. This is
exacerbated by the debilitating impact these events have on
economic activities, depriving the country of much needed revenue
at a critical time.

As I speak to you this minute, dangerous storms are gathering in
the western Atlantic. As climate change warms the seas and feeds
the rainstorms, the risk of future loss and damage grow.

Yet, the price of production and consumption of goods that
contribute to climate change, is not set to compensate us for our
losses and damages, resulting from it.
6

Madam President:
From the perspective of our s ared destiny, these goods will be
over-produced and over-consumed. Climate change is not a freak
of nature. It is as man-made, as power and greed.

The polluter pays is an accepted principle - a golden nexus of
morality, economics and environmental policy.

The ‘polluter pays’ is tried and tested at the national level. But,
alas, on the international level, it is the victim who pays.
Consider the insurance model championed by many industrialised
countries and international agencies, as the solution to climate
change.

Island states on the front line are being asked to take out additional
insurance against the losses and damage, which are the direct
results of a change in climate caused by others. This is asking the
victim to pay by installment.
The insane equivalent would be the arsonist saying to you, that
instead of trying to stop him setting fire to your house, you should
take on fire insurance.

Distinguished Delegates:
If our principal response to man-made climate change, is to make it

easier for the victims to foot the bill, then the march of climate
change will press on unimpeded.
This, therefore, is untenable, indefensible and downright
unacceptable.

Madame President:
7

The game changer would be, establishing a different kind of
insurance, especially for vulnerable and at-risk countries like

ours, that pays out quickly to the victims of climate disasters.

Fairness requires that this insurance mechanism must be funded by
those who have contributed most to climate change. Additionally,
this needs to be scaled up as a matter of urgency.

We have a Caribbean Risk Insurance Fund which paid out funds
vital for the immediate relief efforts, but it does not have the
capacity to insure against loss and damage.

Today, I wish to propose that the United Nations oversee a
‘Climate Loss nd Damage Insurance Fund, where premiums

are paid by those who have contributed most and continue to
contribute to climate change and that payouts go quickly to those
who suffer the direct consequences of climate disasters, once

independently declared to be such.
Madam President:

Ending the inequality that separates those who gain and those who
lose will remove the fuel lines of climate change. This is what an
international community serious about halting climate change,
must do.

Madam President:
We urge you to do this and we hope your feet are swift. Because
we can no longer afford to wait. Our people needed sanctuary and
safety yesterday, not tomorrow.

In the past twelve months, while contending with the sheer hard
graft of relief and early recovery efforts, housing the vulnerable
8

nd restoring essential services, Dominica instituted a plan to
make it the first clim te resilient nation in the world.
We have drafted legislation to establish the Climate Resilience

Executing Agency of Dominica, (CREAD) which will deliver the
projects that will achieve this goal. We have recruited its

leadership and identified a billion dollars worth of critical rojects
to compliment this plan. We ha e rolled u our sleeves and started
work.

Our plan is based around designing super-resilient networks,
water-proofing our economy and building resilient communities.

As we have critically examined the core of what it takes to be
resilient, we have found that what looked insurmountable from a
distance, is not so daunting up close.

Distinguished delegates:
This realization has buoyed up our confidence and re-energised
every Dominican. By the grace of God, therefore, and with the
continued support of our partners in the global community, we will
become the first climate resilient nation in the world.
We encourage other vulnerable small island states, to embark on
building resilience to climate change. The costs, however, are

above and beyond the capacity of small states. Support from the
international organizations and Member States, with the requisite
technical expertise and financial resources is critical.

The role of the UN is therefore central in coordinating and
mobilizing resources. The creation of a special International
Climate Change Resilience Facility, to provide technical and
financial resources, should be given most urgent attention. The

existing global economic and development architecture must
facilitate this new development paradigm.
9

Official Development Assistance (ODA) must be re-engineered to
take into account the vulnerability of small island states and the
imperative of building resilience to climate change. The
international financial institutions (IFIs) must rethink the
classification of debt and the terms and conditions of debt
financing, for essential services and vital infrastructure.

While we battle the effects of climate change, we are supremely
conscious that there are many other challenges confronting our

region and indeed the wider world.
Two emerging global problems brought on by climate change is
that of climate migration and disaster re ugees. Although not yet
full blown, some countries that act as safe havens have begun to
feel the pressures. This further underscores, that the emerging

problems brought on by the effects of climate change, require
urgent global attention.
Dominica calls on these United Nations, to begin the discourse on
both climate migration and disaster refugees, while it is still early.
Madam President;
We champion our region as a Zone of Peace. We remain extremely
concerned about the situation in our sister countries of Venezuela

and Nicaragua. We call for support for a process of dialogue, to
achieve a peaceful resolution, for the benefit of the citizens of
those nations, while respecting and observing the time honored
international norms, of respect for sovereignty and the non¬

interference in the internal affairs of other Nations.

Madam President:
Over many years, this body has debated resolutions to end the
economic and financial blockade of our sister country Cuba. We
10

have long established that maintaining this trade embargo can only
have a negative impact on our brothers and sisters in Cuba.

Notwithstanding its limitations, the Republic of Cuba has come to
the aid of so many around the world, particularly in the areas of
healthcare and education and sometimes in the most trying of
circumstances. We add our voice once again to the chorus of

voices calling for an end to this blockade.
Dominica is in support of a United Nations, where young people,
who account for over forty-percent of the world s po ulation, can

pursue a global youth agenda, with opportunities to dialogue on
key issues that impact their development. Similarly, we
congratulate the stakeholder group of Persons with Disabilities and
other non-state actors for efforts at advancing opportunities for

persons with disabilities, to ensure they remain part of the United
Nations agenda.

Madam President, Distinguished Colleagues,
If we keep looking down at our feet, we will die of sorrow. We
choose to look up. We move forward knowing we are not alone on

this challenging journey.
Twelve months ago, the international community heard our cry and
have stood with us. This has made us stronger and more motivated.
To those who came,, we thank you and urge you to stay the course
over these next few years.

Let us set the example for a better future for all mankind.
Let history record what we did and not what we said. What efforts
we made to end the march of climate change globally, and to
reduce our vulnerabilities locally.

We, together, must grasp this moment.

Thank you and God Bless these United Nations!

12

