PERMANENT MISSION OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC TO THE
UNITED NATIONS

STATEMENT BY H. E. DANILO MEDINA SANCHEZ
PRESIDENT OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

AT THE PLENARY OF THE 73rd GENERAL ASSEMBLY
OF THE UNITED NATIONS

New York, September 25,2018

Check against delivery

Speech by His Excellency, President of the Dominican Republic, Danilo
Medina,
AT the Seventy-Third Regular Session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations
September 25 2018

Your Excellency Mrs. Marfa Fernanda Espinosa Garc4s,

President of the Seventy-Third Regular Session of the General Assembly
of the United Nations;

Your Excellency Antonio Guterres,
Secretary General of the UN;

Sirs Heads of State and Governments;

Gentlemen Heads of Delegations;

Sirs Ministers;

Ladles and Gentlemen;

First of all, allow me to congratulate Ambassador Maria Fernanda Espinosa

Garces, for her election as president of this General Assembly and wish
her every possible success.

For me it is a great honor to be able to address you again as president of
the Dominican Republic.

This is a special occasion for our country, because next year the
Dominican Republic will be part, for the first time, of the Security Council of
the United Nations, as a non-permanent member.

That is why 1want to start by thanking, on behalf of the Dominican people
and myself, the member countries of the UN for the support received to be
part of the Security Council.

In particular, I would like to thank the members of the Group of Countries of
Latin America and the Caribbean, GRULAC, for the trust placed in us.

Our purpose during this period will be to contribute a Latin American and

Caribbean voice to one of the premier instances for maintaining global
peace.

Naturally, from now, we commit ourselves to enforcing, both in the Security
Council and in this Assembly, the same unbreakable principles that guide
us as a nation.

Respect for human rights, democracy, freedom and diversity will therefore
be the beacon we will follow to guide our work in the Security Council.
We will do everything possible to honor the trust placed in us, being fully
aware that stability and safety are priority objectives but also fragile, that
must be preserved and to which advance is made step-by-step, day-byday.
2

We are clear that a space dealing with issues that can alter the history and
destiny of millions of people has no room for easy and drastic unreal
solutions.

In this context, our country will always be a body of dialogue,
understanding, and search for peaceful solutions. We are always willing to
do what it takes to find common ground and support consensus, as the
best tool for peace and development.

Therefore, at all times we will encourage peoples' reconciliation through
mediation and democratic dialogue, thus opening spaces towards a future
of shared lasting peace.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Since the founding of the United Nations Organization, just over seven
decades ago, it has played a central role in keeping a more stable and
secure world for the human population across the globe.
However, we can never consider this stability as a definitive achievement,
we cannot lower our guard knowing, for example, that only In our Latin

American and Caribbean region 35% of the population still belongs to the
so-called "vulnerable claiss", which means that any setback can send them
right back into poverty.

Furthermore, in terms of security, it is fair to recognize that, like so many
other things, it is by far evenly distributed. We ali know that there are
tem'tories in the Americas, and everywhere in the world, where living
peacefully and without fear is almost a Utopia, because of the control
exercised by organized crime in those territories.

What can we then do to build a more incrementally stable world?
What measures to take so that widespread safety is not a privilege of a few
nations, but extents throughout the world reaching every region and
village?

Obviously I'm not the only one who asks these questions. All present here
do them.

Nor will I give definitive answers, because we can only find them working
together.

What I will do is to briefly identify what I consider two of the main threats to
stability and global security: climate change, drug trafficking and organized
crima

At first glance, they may seem very different phenomena from each other,

of course. However, their level of complexify and global reach make them
two of the main challenges facing humanity.

In both cases, the consequences are thousands of temilles destroyed,
collateral damage on all aspects of human development and States
overwhelmed by the magnitude of the challenge they must face.
Let's start by talking about the consequences of naturai disasters.

These phenomena of nature are happening more and more frequently, we
just have to open a newspaper, or tum on the television to find the effects

of climate change wreaking havoc at one point or another of the planet.
From the typhoon that recently hit the Philippines with a force not seen in
decades, to the cyclonic seasons that punish the Caribbean islands with

more and more violence, there's not a safe spot on the planet.
Last year we saw how Hurricane irma left Havana totally flooded and it took
several weeks of heavy effort for to return to a semblance of normality.
As for Puerto Rico, the islands of Antigua and Barbuda, as well as others in
the Caribbean, took several months to somewhat recover from the effects

of Hurricane Maria, which not only brought economic losses, but claimed a
considerable amount of human lives as well.

The

Dominican Republic is strongly

committed to

prevent

the

consequences of climate change. As a result we are focusing
simultaneously on three levels of action: local, national, and international.

Because the local level Is where the dally life of people develops, it is here
where tragedies epitomize a painful reality therefore It is here where the
work of building, preparing and raising awareness must begin.
At this level, which along the national one. Is where our government has
more capacity of action, we are improving resilience and relocating the
communities that live around our most important watersheds; highly
vulnerable to weather phenomena.

We are also doing a great deal of local awareness work, such as training
thousands of teachers and technicians who will promote sustainable
development in their schools and communities.

At the national level we are also working tirelessly, both in our rapid
reaction strategies, and in the prevention field. Thus, for instance, we are

planting millions of trees across our territory, while investing in renewable
energy as never before.

These measures not only support our economy but will as well help reduce
our emissions of greenhouse gases by 25% by 2030. That goal fills us with
satisfaction.

However, the fight against climate change is everyone's task and that is
why this last scenario, the international scenario, is vital; It must be the

broadest and most prevalent of the three. A space in which, if there is no
political will, most of the efforts become useless and negatively impact all
gains achieved at the local and national levels.
6

That is why I reiterate before this Assembly, the utmost importance of going
beyond good intentions and focusing on concrete actions.

And among those actions, I want to once again highlight the urgency of
financing and operationaiizing initiatives such as the Warsaw International
Mechanism of ioss and damage that wiii make it possibie to compensate

for the destruction of infrastructure, ecosystems, and ease the vulnerability
of our residents.

This fund is essentiai so that naturai disasters do not destroy in a few hours

what many nations have spent decades building.

i wili give you just one exampie, keeping in mind that our case is not the
most dramatic in the Caribbean region.

Last year, the passage of the storms Oiga and Maria meant for our country
the destruction of infrastructure buiit for a biilion doilars. Imagine what that

means for a country in which the annuai budget of the State is aiready
iimited.

But above ail, this fund wiil help protect the valuable lives of miiiions of
human beings, bring peace of mind to their homes, aliow them to have a

future without the permanent uncertainty of feeiing threatened every time
they see the rain coming.

For all this, we consider it inevitabie that those countries that have

contributed most to the emission of gases responsible for climate change
are those that, proportionaliy, contribute to this fund established to mitigate
its effects.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

As I described earlier, we consider drug trafficking and organized crime as
a threat to globai security and stabiiity of a magnitude similar to climate
change.

The trafficking of iiiicit substances claims thousands of lives every year,
and especialiy young lives, extremely valuable for our countries. But if this
were not enough, it permeates our institutions, unbalances our economies,

threatens our values and brings nothing but degradation and destruction to
our social fabric.

Wherever organized crime arrives, the security and peace of our people
deteriorates over time.

Therefore, in this area, as with climate change, the fight against drugs must
be carried out at the three mentioned levels: local, national and
international, in order to achieve effective results.

In the case of our country, local intervention is focused on prevention
campaigns and the education of our young people, supporting them with

training

and

entrepreneurial

opportunities,

while

improving

the
8

neighborhoods in which they reside and recovering public spaces for
people to use; ail this with the goal of keeping the most vulnerable
population from crime networks.

At the national level, the security forces and our National Drug Control
Department are battling throughout the entire territory as part of a
comprehensive plan to strengthen actions against drug trafficking.

Among other initiatives, we are acquiring new high-tech equipment and
reinforcing security in our ports and airports with more agents and controls,
as well as carrying out in-depth interventions in areas with the highest
incidence of crime.

Parallel to this, we have advanced with the approval of a law against
money

laundering

and

financing

of

terrorism,

based

on

the

recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force, GAFILAT, with

emphasis on prevention of, and fight against, money laundering to which
the drug traffickers resort to make their operations profitable.

And finally, at the international level, we have bilateral and multilateral

agreements with the United States, the European Union, and the SICA
countries; we participate as well in the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative,

ail with the objective of coordinating efforts and improving our efficiency in
the fight against drug trafficking and organized crime.

Thanks to initiatives like these, we are better prepared to fight together
against this evil that threatens the integrity of our economies and our
democracies.

However, we must insist on the need to deepen this intemational
coordination.

There is much we can move forward if we join efforts, share information
and support each other in this work.

And here we also understand that showing greater commitment is the
responsibility of the countries that, with their domestic demand for
narcotics, have set in motion the international machinery of drug trafficking
and organized crime.

We cannot ignore the fact that it is precisely developing nations that act as
the first barrier to containing drug trafficking, thus protecting the most
developed countries.

To fulfill this role, our countries expend billions of dollars each year, which,
however, are never enough in the face of the resources deployed by
organized crime, which is undoubtedly a key factor in the social
disintegration experienced by many of our countries.

As in the case of climate change, it is the more developed countries with
more consumption capacity that must deploy more resources, cooperation.

10

and political will, if we reaiiy mean to fight this phenomenon with any hope
of victory.

In combating the effects of drug trafficking and climate change, we will be

solving some of the structural causes that lead countries to deepen poverty
and social inequality.

If the United Nations and the developed countries want to help fight poverty
more comprehensively and frankly, these two fronts are a smart, humane

and cost-effective way to do it.

To them, to their responsibility and solidarity, we appeal once again from
this rostrum, to make our planet a safer place.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Climate change, drug trafficking, poverty, social inequality, and mass
migration are ail interrelated problems that we must deal with urgently.

As we have pointed out today, the best and perhaps the only way to do this
is to act upon ail levels of response to the problem.

So that the agreements signed in a space like the UN have a real impact
on the life of the people.

So that the real needs of our people find expression in their national and
even international institutions.
11

Therefore, we must all continue to act, according to our abilities but without
rest and with the same objective; to create a world that is increasingly
stabled, safer, and more developed.

A world where all men and all women can carryout their life project.
This is the ultimate goal for which the Dominican Republic will continue to
work.

In our towns, in our neighborhoods and in all our cities.

With our immediate neighbors, with all of you members of this Generai
Assembly.

And next year, also as part of the Security Council of the UN, in this new
role that we will be honored to assume.

Thank you very much.

12

