EGYPT
The Permanent Mission of Egypt

i—-iloJI

to the United Nations

New York

d

Statement of

H.E. Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi

President of the Arab Republic of Egypt

before the 73"*^ Session of the United
Nations General Assembly
New York, 25 September 2018

Unofficial translation

Madame President,

I would like to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the 73rd
session of United Nations General Assembly, and to express my appreciation for the

efforts of Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, the president of the former session.

I also commend you onyour choice ofthe theme of this year's session, for we
are in dire need for renewing our commitment and contributions towards enhancing
the United Nations role, as a foundation for a just and effective international order.
A world order that is based on the balance of interests and responsibilities, the

respect for state sovereignty, the dissemination of a culture ofpeace, as well as one
that rises above racism, extremism and violence, and achieves sustainable
development.

These are the values that shape Egypt's vision towards the United Nations,

since our participation in the inception ofthe organization seven decades ago, and
throughout the six terms during which Egypt served on the UN Security Council, the
latest of which was in 2016-2017. These values are also the driving force behind

Egypt's active contribution to UN Peacekeeping operations, rendering Egypt the
world's seventh largest troop contributing country.
With such solid belief in the values and role of the United Nations, and in all

frankness, we have to admit that there is a flaw in the international system, which

negatively affects it's performance, and casts a shadow over its credibility in the
eyes of many peoples, particularly in the Arab and African regions, wherein Egypt
lies.

For how can we blame an Arab who questions the credibility of the United

Nations and the values it proclaims, at a time when his region is threatened by the

disintegration and collapse of the nation state, to give way to a wave of terrorism
and sectarian conflicts that deplete the capacities of the Arab peoples? Or how can
we blame an Arab who wonders why the Palestinian people were denied their

legitimate rights lo live in dignity and peace, in an independent state that reflects
their national identity, hopes and aspirations?
Can we consider an overstatement an African's complaint regarding the
ineffectiveness of the world order, when his continent suffers from an economic

order that perpetuates poverty and inequality, reproduces social and political crises
and provides no prospects for progress and development?

Madame President

I raise these questions, as Egypt chairs ofthe Group of77 and China, which
constitutes the majority of the population of this planet, and thus has the greatest
interest in enhancing the role of the United Nations. For the developing countries
can ill afford to exist in an international order, which is not governed by laws and

the lofty principles upon which the United Nations was founded, or one that can be
subject to polarization or attempts by some to dominate over it and impose their will
on the members of the intemational community.

I would hereby like to summarize Egypt's vision in three key principles to

which we ought to renew our commitment, and three causes to which we must accord
priority, for the United Nations to regain its effectiveness and role.
The first such principle is that there can be no way forward towards achieving
an effective intemational order, if its main constituent unit, the nation-state, which

is premised on the notions of citizenship, democracy and equality, is in danger of

disintegration. I speak out of Egypt's unique experience, where its people have

exerted tremendous efforts to restore their state and save their identity. They chose
the nation state to be their vehicle for reform and to realize their aspirations for
freedom, development and dignity.

The disintegration ofnations as aresult ofcivil strife or regression to sectarian
loyalties is responsible for the most dangerous phenomena in our contemporary
world, including armed conflicts, human trafficking, irregular migration, organized
crime and illicit trade in arms and drug trafficking.

There is no doubt that the Arab region is one ofthe most vulnerable to the

dangers of nation state disintegration, and the ensuing creation of a fertile

environment for terrorism and exacerbation of sectarian conflicts. Thus, preserving

and reforming the foundations of the state is a fundamental priority of Egypt's

foreign policy in the Arab region. There can be no way out ofthe crisis in Syria and
the plight of Yemen, except by restoring tlie nation state, preserving its sovereignty
and state institutions, as well as realizing the legitimate aspirations of its people.

Egypt fully supports aUN-led political solution in these two countries, and rejects
any exploitation ofthe these crises to create footholds for regional interventions, or
enable an environment for terrorism, extremism and sectarianism.

This same principle applies to our policy in Libya, where Egypt plays apivotal
role in support ofrebuilding the state, particularly with regards to the unification of

the Libyan aiTned forces so that it is capable ofdefending Libya and countering the
dangers of terrorism.

We should not forget that a year has passed since the adoption of the United
Nations action plan on Libya, which sought to comprehensively address the Libyan
crisis, without achieving progress in its implementation. This requires us to renew
our commitment to a comprehensive political solution, assetforth in the said United
Nations Action Plan. If we are to halt the loss of life, the depletion of Libya's

resources, and move towards the reconstruction phase, then there is no room for

partial solutions neither in Libya nor in Syria or Yemen; crises ofsuch magnitude
require comprehensive and not partial solutions.
Mr. President

The second principle is the commitment topeaceful and sustainable solutions
to international conflicts. This is the raison d'etre ofthe United Nations. Yet, despite
the commendable efforts of the UN in numerous conflicts, including South Sudan,

the Central African Republic and Mali, they have so far fallen short of finding
permanent settlements to such conflicts.
There is also an urgent need to mobilize resources to help countries in postconflict situations to rehabilitate their institutions and commence reconstruction and

development. The fundamental issue here is to translate this principle into tangible
support for national efforts, so as to overcome conflicts and build states in
accordance with their priorities, while avoiding the imposition of alien models of

governance and development, or intervening in the internal affairs of states and
violating their sovereignty.

We cannot talk about the peaceful settlement of disputes as a founding

principle ofthe United Nations and an indicator ofits credibility, without citing the
Palestinian cause. It stands as a perfect example of the failure of the international

system to find ajust solution to the conflict, based on international legitimacy and
United Nations resolutions, that guarantees the establishment of a Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The terms of reference of this just solution and the determinants of a final
settlement are well known. There is no time to waste on such a debate. What is

required is the political will to resume negotiations and achieve a settlement in
accordance with these determinants. I repeat here what I have said in previous years

on this platform, the Arabs are still stretching out their hands in peace. Our peoples

deserve to turn this tragic page in history, and the Palestinian people deserve to
exercise their legitimate rights.
Madame President,

The third principle is the commitment to achieving sustainable development
as a necessary precondition for a stable world order, and the best way for the
prevention of armed conflict and humanitarian crises.
While we welcome the consensus reached on the United Nations 2030

Sustainable Development Agenda, we note however that he implementation of the

goals set forth in this ambitious plan require that we tackle the financing for
development conundrum. This can be achieved though the creation of an enabling
environment which allows for the free flow of resources necessary for development,

without imposing any conditionalities, and supporting national efforts to mobilize
financing for development. The reform of the global economic and financial
architecture cannot be delayed. We look forward to the United Nations to serve as

a platform for developing ideas to achieve this reform, in particular with regards to
the creation of mechanisms that would help halt illicit financial flows out of the

developing countries, and facilitate the return of these vital assets to their rightful
owners.

Madame President

The international commitment to the preservation of the nation state, the

peaceful settlement ofdisputes, strengthening cooperation to achieve comprehensive
development and addressing imbalances in the global economic system are all
necessary conditions for any serious consideration of the revitalization ofthe United
Nations system and the restoration of its credibility.

In order to implement these three aforementioned principles three main

priority areas also need to be addressed, in order to ensure the credibility and the
future of the United Nations and the international order as a whole.

First: We need to strengthen partnerships between the United Nations and

regional organizations, to meet the rising challenges the international community
faces at the political, economic and developmental levels, as well as the security
threats, including protracted conflicts and the proliferation of terrorism. Here, I
would particularly like to emphasize the successful partnership that exists between
the United Nations and the African Union, as a model for burden sharing and

leveraging the comparative advantages of each organization to address the complex
challenges facing our continent, particularly in the fields of peacekeeping, peace
4

building, as well as humanitarian and developmental assistance. As Egypt will
shortly assume the presidency of the African Union in 2019, we look forward to
strengthening the strategic partnership between the Union and the United Nations,
through programs that have a real impact on the continent, and building on the

progress made to consolidate the African Union's post-conflict reconstruction and
development policy. This is in addition to Egypt's hosting of the African Union
Center for Post-Conflict, Reconstruction and Development and the Community of
Sahel-Saharan States Counter-terrorism Center.

Second: We need to continue our efforts to implement the initiative launched

by Egypt during its membership of the UN Security Council, to put in place a
comprehensive International framework to develop policies and bolster cooperation,
in order to counter terrorism and terrorist narratives. In this context, we welcome the

Secretary-General's initiative to convene the United Nations Conference on Counter
Terrorism last June, following the periodic review of the United Nations CounterTerrorism strategy.

As you are well aware, Egypt is engaged, since the beginning of this year in
the comprehensive operation "Sinai 2018" to combat and decisively eradicate
terrorism. This is taking place through a comprehensive strategy that integrates the
security, ideological and developmental dimensions. Based on this experience and
on Egypt's overall experience in supporting counter- terrorism efforts in the Middle
East and North Africa, I can assure you that the level of finance, the sophistication
of arms and training, as well as the means of communication obtained by these

extremist groups, and the facilitation of movement and travel of foreign terrorist
fighters, point to the inevitable need to develop a global system to combat terrorism
wherever it exists, and to counter whoever provides it with support in any possible
way.

Third: We need to address the major shortcomings in the international

community's handling of human rights issues. The credibility of the United Nations
cannot be restored, as long as millions continue to suffer from extreme poverty, live
under foreign occupation or fall victim to terrorism and armed conflict.

The protection ofhuman rights will not be realized through media defamation
orthe politicization ofHuman Rights mechanisms, while ignoring the need to tackle
all human rights in an equitable manner, including economic, social and cultural
rights on equal footing.

Egypt has a solid constitutional foundation for the protection of human rights.
Major strides have been achieved in the field of women and youth empowerment.

Women hold 25% of the ministerial posts and more than 15% of seats in parliament.

International youth conferences, which are held annually in Egypt in November,
have also become a regular forum for the youth to communicate and raise their
concerns. We are determined to continue to accord high priority to the issues of

women economic empowerment, and the causes of the youth, science, technology
and innovation during Egypt's presidency of the Group of 77 and China, as a

practical example of our commitment to the promotion of human rights in a
comprehensive manner.
Madame President,

Egypt, like the vast majority ofthe world's peoples and nations, has a vested
interest inrestoring the credibility ofthe multilateral system with the United Nations
at its forefront. We believe that the Organization can overcome skepticism over its
merits and credibility by restoring the lofty principles upon which its charter was

premised, and acting according to the priorities I addressed, which reflect the
aspirations of our peoples. Only then will our organization reclaim its credibility,
and our peoples regain their confidence in a future ofpeace, cooperation and respect
of one another.

Thank you for listening. May God help us and you for the good of all our
peoples.

