STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY
MR. OSMAN SALEH MOHAMMED

MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF
THE STATE OF ERITREA AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73rd SESSION OF

THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK
29 SEPTEMBER 2018

1

Madam President,
Honourable Heads of Delegation,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Let me join previous speakers to convey our congratulations for your election as
President of the 73rd Session of the UN General Assembly.
This forum provides, annually, a congenial platform for the Member States to
broach critical issues of international peace and security and their ra ifications
on national and human development. In this spirit, allow me to bring to the
attention of this august assembly key matters of para ount importance to my
country and our region as a whole.
As you are all aware, Eritrea a d Ethiopia have recently signed a historic Peace
Agreement that brings to an end the dark, two-decades-old, a chapter of war,
constant tension, and strife.

This historic achievement - even if belated by almost 16 years - will allow both
countries to funnel their resources, potential and positive energy solely towards
much-needed development. It has already infused hope and optimism on the
peoples of both countries.
Its positive dividend for regional peace and security is too palpable to merit
emphasis. This is indeed attested by new frameworks of all-rounded cooperation
that have been set in motion in the past two months or that are on the offing at
the regional level.
Eritrea wishes to express its gratitude to various countries that contributed in
different ways, and that have demonstrated their political goodwill, to the
success of the historical process underway.
Madam President,

Distinguished Delegates,
Let me now revert to a perplexing injustice that has afflicted my country for
almost a decade. I am referring to the unwarranted sanctions that were imposed
on Eritrea in December 2009 and 2011 respectively.
With positive winds of peace flowing in our region, several UNSC member States

are these days calling for the immediate lifting of the deplorable sanctions. The
diplomatic discourse is not however fully coherent.
As it happens, some countries are looking for procedural and other pretexts and
preconditions. The apparent aim is to move the goalpost and maintain the illegal
sanctions on Eritrea.

1

As an aggrieved party, which has stood for nine long years on the receiving end
of the miscarriage of justice, Eritrea cannot and will not plead for clemency or
magnanimity. The people and government of Eritrea will continue to stand up
for their rights until justice is ascertained and wrongs meted to them are
redressed.

Madam President,

Distinguished Delegates,
The transgressions perpetrated against Eritrea are, in many ways, symptomatic
of the hubris and perverse power games that have primarily governed
international relations in our contemporary times. The spiralling crises,
instability, wars, and conflicts that have, and continue to rage, in various parts
of the world are inevitable consequences of the absence of justice; the attendant
outcomes of international power imbalance. When the rule of law is suppressed
and supplanted by the logic of force; when global power balance is compromised,
the inevitable outcomes are intractable crises and escalating wars.
It is against this disconcerting global backdrop that Eritrea was first victimized
and targeted for unlawful and unfair sanctions on 23 December 2009. I will not
bore you with details of the incontrovertible facts; of how and why this act was
imposed; as all relevant information - including confidential communications,
(Wikileaks and all) - have since long been available in the public domain.
However, to sum up, the interplay of forces and factors that brought about the
sanctions were the following:
1. The principal architects of the sanctions were previous US Administrations
who felt that they could use their unassailable power, and raw coercion,
to ram through the UNSC, punitive measures against a small country and
people to advance their misguided regional agenda. It is worth
remembering here that certain officials in the US Administration had
mulled imposing similar sanctions on Eritrea in 1999-2000, at the height
of the border war with Ethiopia, in order to impose asymmetric
arrangements through coercive means. The fabricated charges peddled in
2009 were, in fact, suitable improvisations to implement a prevalent
age da.

2. The second cause for the imposition of the sanctions was the inability of
the UN system to prevent such wrongs from happening as well as systemic

flaws/political horse-trading in the operations of the UN Security Council.
Here again, one must remember that the UNSC had failed to take any

meaningful action against Ethiopia. This was despite the fact that
pre ious Ethiopian regimes had flagrantly violated the UN Charter and the
Algiers Peace Agreement guaranteed by the same UNSC when they refused

to abide by the final and binding decisions of April 13, 2002 of the EritreaEthiopia Boundary Commission, (the EEBC).

2

jl

3. The t ird factor in the imposition of the sanctions was the existence of
governments that served the agenda of major po ers. In the case of the
sanctions on Eritrea, the principal architects resorted to regional Trojan
Horses to imbue an African face to their resolutions.
Madam President,

Distinguished Delegates,
The sanctions imposed on Eritrea for the last nine years have entailed
considerable economic damage to the country and unnecessary hardships on its
people. The related campaigns of smear and defamation have inculcated
immeasurable damage to the reputation of the country and to the prospects and
potential of investment. Perhaps, the biggest damage was the regional instability
and insecurity that this state of affairs bred and exacerbated. The actual cost
incurred and the opportunities forfeited - both at the national and regional le els
- are thus huge.

In the event and in light of the widely acclaimed peace and cooperation that has
broken in the region, certain countries to choose to ignore the stark truth and to
prolong the sanctions regime in Eritrea is astounding.
In the past six decades, the Eritrean people have waged long and difficult
struggles to advance the cause of justice and to foster a climate that is conducive
for mutual security and stability in the region. These robust convictions and
legacy ha e indeed enabled them to withstand all the wrongs and scars
inculcated by the unfair sanctions. Through characteristic resilience and hard
toil, they have now vanquished the injustices perpetrated on them.
As I stressed earlier, the people of Eritrea have not committed a crime or
transgression that impels them to seek clemency. As such, they are not only
calling for the immediate rescinding of the sanctions but they are also asking,
and deserve, amends for the damages incurred and opportunities forfeited.

I thank you!

3

