Check against deliver

Address by the President of the Republic of Estonia Kersti Kaljulaid
at the

United Nations General Assembly

Madam President, Mr. Secretary General, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen

Ten days ago I was in Ukraine. Picking up syringes and empty bottles in a park next
to a kindergarten in the industrial city of Dnipro. It was for the first World Clean-up
Day. The biggest ever civil society action fostered by digital technologies and
voluntary will ofmillions. 15 million in 140 countries, among them many presidents
and prime ministers, decided to do something for our planet. Having responded to
the outcry of Estonians who launched the voluntary clean up action 10 years ago. It
is very easy just to talk about a cleaner environment or climate change. But if you
really want to get things done, then very often you simply must get up and do it
yourself.
In many ways this is also the reason why Estonia is running for the non-permanent
seat at the UN Security Council for 2020-2021. Small countries have no time for
small objectives - our aim is, among other issues, to bring all things digital to the
UN and Security Council - cyber risks are something Estonians as citizens of a fully
digitized state understand better than most. We want to offer our perspective to make
sure that human beings remain safe in this new world were cyber related threats
compound with conventional ones. The vision that we have for the candidacy and
for the UN as a whole is based on three keywords - empathy, equality and efficiency.

First, about empathy. However sad, we must talk about our worries honestly.
Aggression should be called aggression, war is war, and occupation remains
occupation. Regardless if it's Afnca or Europe that we are talking about. I am deeply
touched by the misery that war and conflict bring, whether it's talking with internally
displaced women and children in occupied Eastern Ukraine. Or with Georgian
politicians being told that due to occupation their country will be forever denied full
participation in the democratic world in the formats we, luckier others, so cherish.
Estonia stands in solidarity with all those affected by conflict, terrorism and violent
extremism. We reach out with humanitarian aid, practical assistance and also
peacekeepers, from Africa to Middle East. We do what we can, yet it feels like it is
never enough.
Ongoing military aggression in Eastern Ukraine continues in the very heart of
Europe. Crimean Peninsula remains occupied, as do parts of Georgia, and there is

Check against deliver

no resolution of the conflicts in Africa. It is hard to tolerate these sad issues. Yet it

is no solution to mince words to make ourselves feel better. For those in distress,
recognition of their true situation, together with the humble recognition that we
cannot do much more than commiserate, is offering at least some hope. Some hope
that one day things could be better. A hope that cannot feed on euphemisms avoiding
straightforward admittance.

In July, we reached an agreement on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. And I'm looking forward to its adoption in Marrakech in
December. But an agreement needs implementation. Without implementation, it is
hollow, as hollow as the days ahead for those not knowing where they should lay
their head for the night. Or how to calm their crying, hungry and frightened children.
We need to get up and just help.
The same applies to the Paris Climate Agreement. In order to tackle the global
challenge of climate change that is affecting billions we must implement the
commitments we have collectively taken. Because the effects of climate change are
increasingly felt all over the world. Not only in the developing countries, especially
by smaller island states, where homes, food and even clean drinking water are greatly
at risk and countries are forced to jump through varied and expensive loops in order
to gain access to relief funding. But also in the developed world, where people have
lost their loved ones or homes in European forest fires. Or through hurricanes in
America and the Pacific.

Yet we are still not dealing with root causes. Making the world safe for our children
by applying the proper and best available technology standards to all energy
production and use - both in the developed as well as in developing world. We
should also, and yes, that simply, never forget to switch the light off when leaving
the room, get a conditioner which stops when we open the door - do what we can
when we see that globally we cannot, yet.
Ladies and gentlemen

We are all equals in this hall. Not only because we have declared so in the UN
charter. But also because the challenges we now face are going to affect each and
every one of us. Equality in the face of global challenges is the law of nature. Much
stronger than our international law could ever be. Yet international legal space
matters, as common solutions demand respect of each and every one.

Check against deliver

We see solution in liberal thinking that progress is possible not through polarization,
fragmentation or tribalism. Progress is the force bom out of debate and seeking
common solutions. Sovereign equality, the idea that all sovereign states are equal, is
a fundamental tenet of international law and relations. The role of the UN is to

provide this equality, as a guarantor ofthe mles-based global system. We depend on
each other, whether we like it or not.

And very often it's not the state or intemational organizations that get things done.
But grass-root activism and NGO's who have a vision and a sense of responsibility.
Principled voluntary approach can shift mountains of inefficiency, bad govemance,
neglect and lack of ideas. It can guide and catalyze policymaking, but not replace it.
Recent gender equality movements like HeForShe have come a long way to counter
gender-based and sexual violence. Gender equality is at the very heart of human
rights. This in mind, Estonia works actively in the Commission on the Status of
Women. I have gladly accepted Secretary General Guterres' invitation to co-chair
the High-Level Steering Group for Every Woman Every Child for the next two
years.

During my tenure I intend to raise awareness of the heroic efforts people globally
are making, often working without any institutional support. I wish to demonstrate
how many good ideas globally there are, already found, already tried but only on the
small scale. Ideas which help someone somewhere, waiting to be discovered and
upscaled in order to help as many in the world as possible. I hope to provide
recognition, but also dissemination ofbest practices - often it is the same thing. This
is how I can personally get something done.

Dear colleagues

In terms of efficiency —and that is my third keyword - nothing is more important
than truly effective multilateralism.
Due to its inclusiveness, this organization holds great legitimacy. And due to its high
standards, a moral force. Intemational law should be the primary yardstick of
national interest. Those not so powerful understand it well.

On Security Council reform, we need to win more space for common ground.
Peoples and states, both big and small, should feel that the Security Council acts in
their best interests. For too often, the Council falls victim of its intemal differences

Check against deliver

and clumsy procedures. However, it should not be rendered powerless, especially
when mass atrocities are being committed. We, together with the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, have called for the Security Council members
to feel the responsibility and be held more accountable if blocking action against
breaches of international humanitarian law. It is telling that already 117 states have
signed Code of Conduct launched by the ACT Group. Furthermore, we support
continuously the proposal of France and Mexico that in the face of great human
suffering the Permanent Members should voluntarily restrain from the use of the
veto.

Ladies and Gentlemen, furthermore on efficiency ICT can revolutionize entrepreneurship, education, employment in general, even
healthcare. Digital online services provide economic growth; bring down
unnecessary barriers between citizen and state, between businesses and sectors, and
exceed geographical limits. Estonia has shared its knowledge with many nations of
the world and will continue to do so, in cooperation with UNDP, African Union and
all those interested and willing.
New technologies should always be seen as enablers. They create equal
opportunities, if supported by proper policies. The risks related to them should not
be ignored - also because they do not replace but rather enhance most of our
conventional risks. But well set international legal space should be able to deliver
for humankind and avoid Armageddon scenarios.
No new technology can thrive in a fragmented world. Now more than ever, we need
global free trade as an essential element of fostering long-term development and
growth. Estonia as a small export-dependent country is an advocate of free trade.
Including creating better market access for developing countries and improving
business conditions for investments. Trade and economy are closely linked with
security, as history has so often demonstrated. We stand to protect what the
developed world has achieved. What the WTO stands for. And what aspiring regions
and bodies have set out to achieve. For example, freedom oftrade and work in Africa
through legal space setting by the Afiican Union. We wish them quick success. And
we stand by them to help where we can with our own leapfrogging experience in
digital technologies.

Madam President,

Check against deliver

Empathy starts at home. If we want to care about the others, we need to care about
ourselves as well as the people and environment around us. Being connected and
dependent of each other more than ever, we simply cannot afford to be self-centered
and ignorant. We all need to see the bigger picture.
Empathy can easily be translated into efficiency if we really wish to get things done.
Words are important, but they are not sufficient if not followed by concrete action.
Wars and conflicts continue, global warming speeds up and piles of litter around us
just keep growing. We have equal responsibility to be more pro-active in preventing
and solving the challenges of our times. When feeling helpless, then it's sometimes
best to do the little thing you possibly can. Globally, if we all do our bit, things can
only get better. Our globe cannot take any more fi-ee riding. Any more hand wringing
that "we cannot". Any more inaction. Any more hiding behind our current comforts
- in order to forget what will be the state of the world we leave to our children. So
let's act individually and collectively. Today. Every day.
Thank you!

