Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Eswatini

to the United Nations

Statement by

His Majesty King Mswati III
Head of State of the Kingdom of Eswatini
During the General Debate of
73rd session of the United Nations
General Assembly

26 September 2018
New York

Please Check Against Delivery

East 50th Street ¦ New York, Ne York 10022 • (212) 371-8910 • Fax: (212) 754-2755 • eswatini@un.int

1

Madam President,
Your Excellenc es,
Heads of States and Government,
United Nations Secretary-General,

Distinguished Delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Introduction
It is a great honour for me to address this 73rd United Nations General
Assembly, where we have come to renew our commitment to creating an
enabling environment for all mankind.

UNGA Theme
Madam President,

The theme of this session, Making the United Nations relevant to all
people: global leade ship and shared responsibilities for peaceful,
equitable and sustainable societies , resonates well with the UN General

Assembly resolution 72 / 276 adopted on the 31st May 2018.
The resolution is aimed at repositioning the UN Development system to better
support countries towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development

Goals (SDGs), under stronger national leadership and international
cooperation.

Role of the UN
When UN was established by our predecessors back in 1945, the main purpose
was to reduce tensions and avert another conflict after World War II.
Since then, we have converged at this General Assembly as a family to renew
this commitment and analyse how we address challenges affecting the world.
It is a time to assess whether we are still living up to the ethos of our
forefathers, that sought to ensure the world never again gets to endure
another world war, but rather finds peaceful solutions to resolving possible
conflict.
We are all aware of the existing pockets of tensions in different regions of the
world which require that UN Member States speak in one voice when providing
possible peaceful solutions.
A fragmented approach would render peaceful solutions elusive for the
affected countries.

2

It is therefore imperative that we engage and resolve issues together as a
United Nations family in order to ensure we end up with lasting solutions.
To those countries experiencing conflict situations, we appeal to them to come
up with home-grown solutions to address their differences.
We urge these nations to avoid the use of force in an attempt to impose
change. Where they do not see eye to eye, they need to adopt dialogue as
the best way to find lasting solutions.
Where there is no loss of blood, unity prevails, whereas violence begets

instability.
Those who have lost lives and property in conflicts don t forget and their
bitterness makes nation building efforts much harder to achieve.

The UN Member States are strongly urged to avoid fuelling tensions in troubled
countries with a divided approach to interventions, as this subsequently
defeats the purpose of the establishment of the United Nations.
Our approach should always be to search and find an amicable way forward
to all the challenges we face for the greater good of mankind.

Social elfare Challenges
Another great concern is the imbalance between the rich and poor which

continues to widen by the day. This is despite putting in place sustainable
development goals aimed at bridging this divide.
As a UN family we need to pay serious attention to these imbalances as they
contribute to terrorism and social strife in the world.
The Afr can Union has also set out to improve lives with a goal to realise a well

developed Africa for all by 2063.
It is important to support such programmes, which are similar to initiatives of
other regions of the world, some of which have recorded great advancement
in this regard.
We urge the successful blocs to play a meaningful role in supporting
developing countries that have good programmes to transform their
economies but lack the means to do so.
The slow process of development for these countries adds to the burden of
failing to cater for the social needs of the people.

3

We need to find ways and solutions to speed up the process of developing
sustainable economies in line with our sustainable goals by removing the
stumbling blocks to development.
It is perhaps time that we engage researchers to look into what developing
countries need in order to fast-track economic growth and identify high
turnover capital projects that would be best suited to catalyse this endeavour.
No country deserves to go for a whole year without investment. There are
numerous successful countries that can share their experiences of success.
We can use these to assist developing countries in order to ensure that no
country is left behind as we strive to achieve our developmental objectives.
The African continent remains challenged with various diseases such as Ebola,
HIV, Malaria, TB, and many others that require large sums of funding to
overcome.

Africa has taken a resolution to eliminate these diseases within a short space
of time. However, without funding this will remain a challenge.
Some of these health issues need further analysis as in some cases, where we
have recorded success; we are confronted with the re-emergence of some of
them in a more vicious state.
It would be remiss of us not to thank and commend the support we receive
from members of the UN family to needy countries, especially for health issues
in Africa.
We need to ensure that every citizen has access to basic needs such as clean
water, health and free primary education.
We commend those countries that have reached the level of providing free
education. It is only through investing in education that nations may produce

a highly qualified citizenry and get to realise their full development potential.
The need to reduce unemployment is a global challenge. So too is catering for
the elderly community that has contributed immensely to the development of
each country. They deserve to be cared for once they have run their mile.
Addressing these issues is increasingly becoming a challenge given the
declining donor funding, which means more hardships for our people.

4

We should, however, seek alternative means of raising funding to avoid the
undesirable situation where people resort to helping themselves cope with the
global challenges.
This poses a threat to peace as they may do so in ways that would divert
resources from addressing already ex sting challenges, such as diseases.
The UN and the. African Continent
Ma am President,
It is unfortunate that the African Continent continues to absorb more
peacekeeping missions than any other United Nations regional grouping.
This qualifies Africa proper representation in areas of peace and security,
making it a key player as and when matters of peace and security are
discussed in all structures of the United Nations.

We therefore plead that Africa should not be left behind. Her voice must be
heard and featured prominently and permanently at the United Nations.
As negotiations of reforms of the United Nations Security Council progress,
the Kingdom of Eswatini calls for favourable consideration of the common
African posit on and also for those countries that are not members of the
Security Council.
Africa calls for the allocation of not less than two permanent seats, with all
the prerogatives and privileges of permanent membership - including the right
of veto; and five non-permanent seats, in the United Nations Security Council.
Progress made in Sustainable Development Goals
Madam President,

We remain confident that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
Agenda 2063 of the African Union will continue to give us the proper guidance
and impetus necessary to eradicate poverty and create inclusive and
sustainable development for all.

The Kingdom of Eswatini has made significant strides in localising and
integrating the SDGs in its national planning processes.

We have finalised the review of the National Development Strategy (NDS)
1997-2022 and will soon be launching a Revised National Strategy.
The strategy is themed: the Development Strategy for Eswatini - Promoting
Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth. This is expected to

accelerate the implementation of the SDGs in the Kingdom.

5

Innovation and Research
The Kingdom of Eswatin is fully involved in working towards a knowledgebased economy through development of science, technology and innovation
infrastructure in a bid to facilitate research and development.

The Royal Science and Technology Park continues to be a key entity aimed at
advancing scientific research and related fields.

We would like to express our profound gratitude to the friends of the kingdom
who are supporting us in our endeavour to develop these fundamental
initiatives.
However, this work remains in progress since innovation, research and
development are evolving.
Therefore, the Kingdom continues to seek more support for further

strengthening of these initiatives that contribute to attainment of our National
Vision of 2022 and the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals.
Parliame tary National Elections 2018
Madam President,

ust a few days ago, the people of the Kingdom of Eswatini held a very
peaceful national election, which was free and fair. We are glad that
international observers were in attendance to monitor the elections, and their
conclusions were in line with our expectations.
During the elections, the people nominate candidates in their chiefdoms to
compete at constituency level, which we call Tinkhundla.
The system ensures direct participation and promotes participatory democracy
among our people. It is home grown and is enshrined in our customs,
traditions and constitution.

We fully support the participation of women in political decision-making
positions and have recently enacted the election of women members to the
House of Assembly Act to ensure their representation in parliament.

Gender Equality
Madam President,
As a country we have also successfully enacted the sexual offences and
domestic violence act, a legal framework to protect women from domestic
violence and sexual assault.

6

This will give effect to relevant international legal instruments, including the

United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW), among others.
50/50 National Do le Celebrations
We are pleased to inform this noble assembly that the Kingdom celebrated
her 50 years of independence early this year.
We were grateful that the country has been able to champion her development
agenda as a free nation for 50 years.
During this celebration the nation decided to revert to our original name, which
is Eswatini. Since time immemorial the name for the Kingdom has always been
Eswatini.
Middle-Income Categorisation
Madam President,
Let me emphasise that the United Nations call to leave no one behind,
requires their identification, knowing where they are and understanding how
they live- as well as identifying how they can be assisted in order to be at par
with the rest.

Addressing these issues will go a long way in rendering the United Nations
more relevant to all people in the world.

We would like to bring to your attention the unfavourable impact of being
categorised as middle-income country on accessing external resources.
This comes at a time when we need even more resources to inject innovations
into our development programmes around SDGs.
We sincerely hope that the commendable reform efforts of the SecretaryGeneral will help support and reinforce our efforts in accessing external
resources and securing sustainable funding mechanisms, that will assist us
advance towards realisation of the SDGs by 2030.

Re blic of China, Taiwan
Madam President,
The Kingdom of Eswatini reiterates her unwavering stance in calling upon the

United Nations to afford the people of the Republic of China, Taiwan, the
opportunity to partake and contribute to the United Nations Development
system.

7

Taiwan s experience in the various fields, vital to the dimensions of sustainable
development, would go a long way in contributing to the work and
membership of the United Nations.

It is a strong call that the People of Taiwan are not left behind in making the
United Nations relevant to all people to be in line with the spirit of universality.
Conclusion
Madam President,
As I conclude, let me extend my congratulations on your election as the
President of this 73rd session of this Assembly.

We commend the United Nations General Assembly for the choice and the
confidence it has in you as the fourth female President of this august body in
its 73 years of existence.
Let me assure you of the Kingdom's full support as you execute your duties
and responsibilities during your term of office.
We further appreciate the Secretary-General and all members of his staff for
the continued support and hard work in improving the working mechanisms
and relevance of the UN systems to all Member States.
From this session we hope we shall come out with meaningful goals that will
chart a better future for our respective countries.

I thank you - may the Almighty God bless us all.

