PERMANENT MISSION OF THE FEDERAL
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
TO THE UNITED NATIONS

n+nn*.

TflAji 5i& m>MtrtV
ft I XfD* fCfl

866 Second Avenue, 3rd Floor • New York, N.Y. 10017

REMARKS
BY
H.E. DR. WORKNEH GEBEYEHU

MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS OF THE
FEDERA DEMOCR TIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
AT
THE 73rd SESSION OF THE UNITED NA IONS
GENERAL ASSEMB Y

28 SEPTEMBER 2018

' NEW YORK

Madam President,
Allow me to start by expressing my warmest congratulations to
you on your election as President of the 73rd session of the General
Assembly. I c n assure you of my delegation s fullest support and
cooperation in the effective discharge of your responsibilities. Let me
also convey my sincere appreciation to your predecessor for his able
leadership of this august assembly for the past year.

This, of course, is a year in which the United Nations lost one of
its icons

someone who rose through the ranks to lead the

organization and someone who, as the Secretary-General rightly said,

truly represented what the United Nations is all about. We mourn the
loss of this illustrious son of Africa who left an enduring mark on the
world stage.

Madam President,
We are meeting at a time when multilateralism is facing serious
challenges and yet there has never been a time when we need
multilateralism more. This is why this gathering of nations under the
umbrella of the United Nations is so important. It remains the only
universal organization whose very ideals of freedom, equality and
justice are still as valid today as they were at its inception. As

i

Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia stated in his address to the
General Assembly in October 1963: The Charter of the United Nations
expresses the noblest aspirations of man: abjuration of force in the
settlement of disputes between states; the assurance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,

language or religion; the safeguarding of international peace and
security .

This remains profoundly true; and let me take this opportunit
today to assure you that Ethiopia, as a founding member of the United
Nations, will continue to adhere to these ideals and to the principles of
multilateralism as we face unprecedented challenges and threats to
our community of nations. Ethiopia s contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping is second to none. We remain totally committed to this
noble endeavor as we reform and adapt to the new and challenging
realities of peacekeeping. We fully endorse the Secretaty-General’s

Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments to United Nations Peacekeeping to tackle the challenges
peacekeeping faces today.

2

Madam Presid nt,
Six months ago, a peaceful transfer of power took place in
Ethiopia. It has opened a new chapter in our country s political and
social history, offering realistic and genuine possibilities of change
that will meet the hopes and expectations of our youthful population;
changes that are in line with the new political and democratic realities
we are implementing; changes that have been welcomed and
embraced by Ethiopians across the length and breadth of the country.
Creating a just, peaceful, equitable and sustainable society is the
vision we are supporting as we build a new society on the foundations
and achievements of the past. It is a vision, I believe, highly
appropriate and relevant to our discussion here at this session of the
General Assembly and of the theme selected for this Gener l Debate.

Ethiopia and the people of Ethiopia have frequently shown their
resilience and strength often enough in the past in times of adversity.
We are quite confident we will continue to do so. No difficulties are
insurmountable. There are, of course, challenges that we continue to

encounter in working to ensure the benefits of economic growth and
development are widely shared among all sections of our people. We
are working today to widen and deepen the reforms necessary to

3

promote democratic governance and the rule of law; to promote

fairness and justice, better financial and economic management; to
promote transparency and accountability across the entire

administration of governance; to promote popular participation and an
effective democracy.

In the last six months we have exerted every effort to make sure

all this, together with our message of forgiveness and reconciliation
strengthens the unity and solidarity of our people. The new

government led by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed is taking a series of
measures: opening up the democratic space in every direction,
opening up the economy, removing previous constraints on

development such as corruption, human rights violations, and failures
of administration and governance. In other words, we have been, and

are continuing, to respond to the hopes and aspirations of our people.
These reforms have been welcomed across the country.

And, Madam President, we have not confined our efforts to
Ethiopia. Another highly important, historic, development is what is
happening in our region. In the last three months my Prime Minister
has also launched equally significant reconciliation across the horn of

4

Africa region. This is t e start to a real process of normalization
between and among the countries of the Horn.

Ethiopia and Eritrea have opened a new chapter in their
relationship, ending two decades of conflict. We are normalizing

relations and charting a future in which our relationship will truly
reflect the longstanding ties between our two peoples. Somalia and
Eritrea have reconciled their differences and re-established diplomatic
relations. It marks a new relationship between the two countries.

Early this month, we held a Trilateral Summit of Eritrea,
Ethiopia and Somalia in Asmara. We Foreign Ministers then visited
Djibouti, opening a new phase in relations between Djibouti and

Eritrea. The AU Commission Chairperson has rightly called this a
clear demonstration of the value and effectiveness of the search of
African solutions to African problems.

Recently, my Prime Minister and the President of Eritrea signed
a further compressive cooperation Agreement in Jeddah; and

Presidents of Eritrea and Djibouti shook hands in Jeddah, ending a
decade of dispute. In light of these important and positive
developments, it is only appropriate and timely that the Security

5

Council now seriously considers lifting the sanctions imposed on
Eritrea. A few days ago, the South Sudanese parties signed the
Revitalized Peace Agreement for South Sudan at an Extraordinary
Summit of IGAD Heads of State and Government in Addis Ababa. This
offers the real prospect for peace in South Sudan after five years of
civil war.

Madam President,
These are major developments in the Horn of Africa. This is as
the Secretary-General put it, a powerful wind of hope blowing across
the Horn of Africa. It is a wind that offers a "start to unraveling years
of conflict and suspicion across the region - a region which has been
one of the most conflict-ridden in Africa, Horn of Africa is indeed
becoming hope of Africa.

While all these major steps towards "silencing the guns in our
region is taking place, it is equally important to extend the process to
promote a framework for regional economic integration to fight
poverty. Equally regional economic cooperation will make a real
contribution to help rid of violence and war as well as promote "deeper
regional and continental integration in line with Agenda 2063.”

6

In light of the challenges we face together as a region, the choice
we have is very clear. The historic, cultural, social and linguistic links
that bind our peoples form a proper basis to strive for common
prosperity. We believe regional integration, which benefits all countries
of the Horn, is the only viable option we have for meaningful
development. We are already seeing dividends through regional
integration projects. We are now working to accelerate such efforts,

building on what we have already achieved.

Finally, Madam President, let me underline that Ethiopia is,
and will always remain, firmly committed to exerting every possible
effort towards creating peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies in
our sub-region and our continent Africa. As a non-permanent member

of the Security Council, we have been doing everything we can to
support this important and noble cause and we will continue to do so
in the spirit and commitment of nurturing peace, security and
stability for the common good of our countries.

I thank you

7

