f l-J i
The President of the General Assembly,

The Secretary General of the United Nations,
Excellencies,

Distinguished delegates.

Bula vinaka and a very good day to you all. Madame
President, allow me to congratulate you on assuming

the presidency of this I'i"^ session of the General
Assembly. Every year brings fresh challenges and new
crises, even as the crises of last year and the year
before await some resolution, or even some respite.

This

body—the

United

Nations—is continually

challenged to stand between parties in conflict, to
ease the suffering of refugees and migrants, and to
continue its work to build a more peaceful, just and

equal world. The Fijian people have always been
proud Of our nation's full engagement with the
United Nations. We have been a willing and energetic
presence in peacekeeping efforts around the world.

and we are now proudly putting every ounce of

energy we have into the fight to save this planet and
its people—all of us—from a catastrophic warming of
our climate.

Madame President, Fiji will soon celebrate national
elections for the second time since our return to

democracy. I say celebrate with a purpose, because

truly free elections are the very starting point for
democracy and freedom. If the people cannot choose

their government freely, then their other freedoms
are always in jeopardy.

I am proud of what we have accomplished in our
Fijian democracy. Where we once had only the shell
of democracy, we have now pierced that shell, and

we have brought the Fijian people into a genuinely
inclusive society in

which

minority

rights are

respected and all citizens are equal not just in name,

but in fact. That is the great promise of the 2013 Fijian
Constitution, which has been the beacon for our

progress through its vast array of political and socio
economic protections for every Fijian.

Today in Fiji and forever, we make no distinctions
based on ethnicity, social status or religion, and we
enforce our laws that guarantee that equality. We
have reinforced our democracy by passing laws to

empower girls and women and protect them from
violence. We have reformed our education system so

that it provides real opportunity for all Fijians,

regardless of income and regardless of whether they
live in the capital or the most remote islands and

regardless of gender. This year, we achieved an over
90 per cent level of literacy in the country, over 90
per cent of girls in Fiji complete 15 years of secondary
education, and just under 90 per cent of our boys do
the same. We are building our future on this firm
foundation of education.

We have also reformed our welfare programmes to
provide not just a stronger safety net, but also to
create greater opportunity for the most vulnerable in
our society.

So while we provide free medicines and subsidised

electricity, we also award grants to micro businesses
as a way of lifting people out of poverty and

rewarding

and

encouraging

self-reliance

and

entrepreneurship.

This approach goes beyond mere government
programmes

for

the

disadvantaged,

Madame

President. It is based on a fundamental principle that
the socio-economic rights of all Fijians must be

protected. Those include the right to a quality
education, the right to receive treatment and

medication when they are ill, the right to decent
housing, the right to clean water and electricity, and
the right to transportation that is affordable and
accessible.

We

have

also strengthened

our independent

institutions—our judiciary and the independent
commissions that protect consumers,fight corruption,

provide legal assistance, advocate and promote

human rights and carry out many of the activities of

government

that

must

be free

of

political

considerations. I may be disappointed at times when

my government loses a case in court, but those
defeats are signs of strong, independent institutions,

something that we must support and reinforce. They
serve to strengthen the people's belief that everyone

in Fiji can get justice. If people believe in the courts,
they will go to the courts to settle their disputes, and
they will trust the courts to adjudicate without fear or
favour.

There is no doubt that the Fijian people have a strong

and abiding love for freedom. We want to live free.

and we see freedom, democracy and—perhaps most
important of all—tolerance as powerful forces for
peace in the world.
It is with this clearly demonstrated vocation for
personal freedom, tolerance, and social justice that

Fiji is a candidate during this General Assembly for

membership on the United Nations Human Rights
Council. We have thought hard about human rights
and taken actions to be a better nation, a nation that

encourages respect for the dignity of every person.

And we look forward to bringing that point of view
to the critical work of the Council.

Fiji looks to a future free of racism, nepotism and

privilege. A future where the rights of all persons are
guaranteed and enforced by a robust constitutional

framework that reaffirms and protects civil and
political rights as well as social, cultural and economic
rights.

Madame President, our value to the Human Rights

Council is also underpinned by our long experience

in peacekeeping. It was exactly 40 years ago when Fiji
first participated in UN Peacekeeping.
Over those 40 years, which have seen Fijians serving

in Africa, the Sinai, East Timor and throughout the
Middle East, we have come to identify ourselves as a

peacekeeping nation, and it makes us proud. It is
something we offer to the global community, to our
fellow human beings.

Also in those 40 years, we have witnessed first-hand

the way intolerance embraces and leads to repression,
violence and mass migration. We have had our
experience with intolerance in Fiji. It was an ugly
experience that corroded our trust in each other and
our sense of who we are as a people. We must
remember it so that we do not repeat it, and we will

never stop working to keep it in our past.

Madame President, I am proud to stand before you

and report that Fiji is in its ninth year.of strong

economic growth, i believe that is due in no small
part to the democratisation that has taken root and is

flourishing.
Democracy is based on a belief in the people, in the

belief that everyone is capable of great things if only
they are given equal opportunity.

When people see that they have opportunity, that

they can get justice, that they can speak their minds
and be heard, and that their hard work will be

rewarded, they invest their money and their sweat in

their future and in greater possibilities for their
children. They stay at home and contribute rather

than emigrate. And they feel free to let their hopes
and ambitions soar. And that drives a thriving
economy.

But that optimism must be nurtured and supported
through intelligent government actions. In Fiji, we

have reformed the tax laws to make them simpler and
more just. As a part of that, we have begun rigorously

enforcing our tax laws to ease the burden on those
who have little and to ensure that whoever needs to

pay, pays their fair share.

People who take risks and mount successful businesses
should enjoy the fruits of their hard work, but they
must also do their part to sustain the nation. Tax

cheating is an offence against the people, and we will
root it out and penalise it wherever it exists.

We have also reformed our state enterprises to make

them profitable and efficient. The people of Fiji and
the employees of these companies have been the
main beneficiaries, because better capitalisation and

better management has produced better service,
increased investments, and higher wages.

We also see small and medium-sized enterprises as

important ways of promoting growth and lifting
people out of poverty. I am proud to say that my

government has given grants worth 32.4 million
dollars to small and micro enterprises, and we have

been

rewarded

with

explosive

growth

and

extraordinary innovation in that sector.

A free people, Madame President, need an economic

structure that serves them and makes them optimistic.
It is one of the basic pillars of democracy.

Madame President, Fiji is coming to the end of its
presidency of COP23,of the United Nations' ongoing

climate negotiations among the nations of the world,
but the struggle to fight global warming and to end
the degradation of our oceans will continue to be
Fiji's highest priority.

The many disastrous effects of climate change that we
are seeing in the South Pacific or around the world
are well-documented. The same can be said of the

enormous stresses on our oceans arsing

from

acidification, overfishing, warming and plastic refuse.
The time to debate those facts is long past.

As the Fijian Prime Minister, 1 meet thousands of

Fijian women, men and children every year who
have suffered from the latest wave of climate-related

impacts; the cyclones, the flooding, the prolonged

droughts, and the steadily rising seas. 1 meet with the
farmers whose crops have been washed away, the
teachers and students who have lost their schools and

the families whose homes have been destroyed. They
want their Prime Minister to demand that the world
take action on their behalf.

The commitments we have all made through our

Nationally Determined Contributions or NDCs fall
woefully short of the mark. They simply will not get

us to the goal of the Paris Agreement of reducing the
rate of global warming to well below 2 degrees
Celsius target —let alone the more ambitious target
of 1.5 degrees.

What matters now, Madame President, is action. Fiji

will press for more action on climate change and
ocean health in every forum that we are a part of.

We can't simply wait on the rest of the world, with
climate impacts already bearing down upon us. We

are already taking steps to boost our resilience.

Fiji has begun a project to improve access to
sustainable water supply and sewerage services to
approximately 270,000 Fijians. We will provide

cyclone

insurance

coverage

for

low-income

households. We are relocating entire villages and
communities to escape the rising seas. We're

rebuilding our infrastructure back from cyclones to a

higher, far more resilient standard. We're working to
protect communities that face unacceptably high risks

of flooding. Fiji became the first emerging market to
issue a sovereign green bond to fund such activities.

But, Madame President, no government alone can
combat climate change. The challenge is simply too

great. That is why, from the beginning of Fiji's
presidency of COP23, 1 have sought to build a Grand
Coalition of governments, the private sector, labour,

religious groups and civil society to take initiative and
bring forth ideas and solutions great and small.
Madame President, 1 am confident that 1 speak for all

Fijians and all Pacific islanders when 1 say that 1 lose

patience with national leaders who proclaim their
deep concern over climate change and then do little

or nothing to lead their nations on a more ambitious
path to reducing greenhouse-gas emissions.

Leaders who ignore this threat and give their people
new coal-fired power plants instead of a better future
for their children are either tragically short-sighted or

simply engaging in a most cynical form of betrayal.
And their people—all people—^will bear the burden.

Madame President, the world has embraced the

Pacific tradition of Talanoa - a tradition of open and
honest dialogue, it will help to raise our collective
ambition. But ambition without action—without a

plan—is just talk. The Talanoa Dialogues will reach a
crescendo in Katowice at COP24. We cannot let
Katowice fail. Katowice cannot became another

Copenhagen.

Madame President, we are not only calling on other
to act - we are leading from the front. Earlier this
week, I announced that Fiji will commit to

significantly raising its NDC. Fiji will be a net-zero
greenhouse gas emission country by 2050.

Madame President,

Fiji is proud to have launched the Ocean Pathway
Partnership with the Government of Sweden. We

know that the interaction of ocean ecology and
climate change is so profound.

We cannot attempt to solve the crisis of one without

confronting the crisis of the other.

Our oceans are suffering from the stress of human

activities that go beyond climate change, including
pollution, overfishing and acidification.
Madame President, 1 draw the world's serious

attention to the need to help developing nations—

particularly the most disadvantaged and vulnerable
to overcome climate and oceans stresses. They need

access to finance, they need practical solutions. They
need the United Nations to help them get there.
Madame President,

It has been an honour for Fiji—and for me

personally—^to lead the United Nations efforts on
climate change this year. 1 am proud of what we have
accomplished.

The World has never needed the United Nations

more. The existential problem of climate change

requires us to work together. The challenge of
mobilising finance for climate resilience requires us to
work together. More complex and more globalised

conflicts require us to work together.

Madam President , Fiji is firmly committed to the
United Nations. We need the United Nations to be

at its best of we are to have any chance of

overcoming the grave challenges that Fiji and the
world now confront.

Vinaka vakalevu. Thank you.

