STATEMENT

H.E. MR. ADAMA BARROW
PRESIDENT
OF THE

REPUBLIC OF THE GAMBIA
AT THE

GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE

73"^° SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

TUESDAY 25™ SEPTEMBER 2018
NEW YORK

Mr. Secretary-General,
Madam President,

Your Majesties,

Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

Ail praise is due to the Almighty Allah for granting us the favor of gathering in
this August Assembly, once again, to discuss and advance our common global
agenda. Please allow me to begin by sincerely thanking H.E. Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak for the excellent manner he presided over the 72 Session as President.
By the same token, I congratulate you. Madam Maria Garces on your
assumption of the Presidency of the 73 Session. I assure you that, as one of
your Vice Presidents, The Gambia pledges its full support and cooperation
during your tenure of office.
Madam Presidentj

The theme for the 73'^^ Session, "Making the UN relevant to all people: global

leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies," is indeed very relevant in today's global affairs. By implication, the
pursuit of the UN's mission for peace, development and human rights also
remains as relevant today as it was in 1945 when it was adopted in response to
the horrific experiences and destruction during that gloomy era.

Amid the complex multilateral challenges that continue to confront us globally,
no country can thrive or solve all its challenges in isolation. Our salvation, as
human beings, lies in strengthening our multilateral institutions and fostering
greater international cooperation to collectively address global challenges. The
UN uniquely provides the opportunity to achieve this goal.
Madam President,

It is apparent that in order to make real progress, effective global leadership is
imperative. Thus, as leaders, we must all shoulder our responsibilities by all
means. This should compel us to support and invest more in the United
Nations, instead of withdrawing our participation or cutting back our financial
support.

It is an irony that at a time when multiple global challenges are emerging and
mounting, support for the work of the United Nations is being undermined
through inadequate funding.

Those of us who value the UN,as well as those who have benefitted immensely
from its work, should be at the forefront to call upon all Member States to step

up support for the Organization. Indeed, the UN has to play a lead role in
solving global challenges, and our task is to ensure that it has the required
capacity, influence and effectiveness.
Madam President,

Decisions and actions rooted in a rules-based international system that is

underpinned by multilateral agreements and processes form the basis for the
successful conduct of relations between and among nations.

Let us, therefore, restore faith in our rules-based international order so as to
remain relevant and, collectively, make progress on our global agenda - ranging

from tackling the menace of climate change and terrorism to addressing
disarmament, trade, development and other concerns to humanity.
Madam President,

I am confident that it is only through effective Global Leadership and effective
International cooperation that the well-being of all of the world's citizens can
be achieved.

As leaders, we have the shared responsibility to promote a world order that

prioritizes peace over insecurity; a world order that eliminates the growing
inequalities around the world; and a world order that brings us sustainable
development.
Madam President,

With reference to The Gambia, and following a difficult political impasse in

December 2016, Gambians have managed, with the support of our partners, to

restore democracy and the rule of law in our country. We have completed our
national electoral process in full, after successfully conducting both legislative
and local government elections.

2I

We are also resolutely pursuing institutional and constitutional reforms. Such
reforms have commenced, with the hope of putting The Gambia on a solid path
to becoming a shining champion of democracy and human rights in the world.
Madam President,

W^hen Gambians voted for change in 2016, they actually yearned to be in charge

of their destiny. They wanted significant, not cosmetic, improvements in their
lives. It is for this reason that my government is now implementing a

comprehensive National Development Plan (2018-2021). The Plan seeks to
transform The Gambia through key priorities, such as infrastructural

development, agricultural transformation, macroeconomic stability, job creation
and employment. The Plan also seeks to consolidate our democratic gains
through good governance, rule of law and respect for human and people s rights.
In all, our goal is to deliver a fully transformed Gambia that has a future; a
country that is energy secure, food-self-sufficient and an investment friendly
destination.

We have also begun to exploit and harness the benefits of Information
Communication Technology as a catalyst for modernization and youth
empowerment.

Madam President,

Our National Development Plan was presented to a successful Donors
Conference in Brussels, where significant pledges were made to meet our

funding targets. I must express yet again, profound thanks to our bilateral and
multilateral partners, including the United Nations, European Union, World
Bank and many others for their interest and support. We are indeed truly
grateful, as we look forward to their continued collaboration and support to
attain our development objectives.

The NDP w ill continue to be implemented through the partnerships and

solidarity built at the Brussels meeting. Quite thoughtfully, the Plan is
consistent with the Agenda 2030 on Sustainable Development, as well as the
African Union Agenda 2063.

3I

n

Madam President,

In our pursuit of a fully transformed Gambia, we recognize the importance of a

meaningful engagement with The Gambian Diaspora - fondly referred to as

"The Eighth Region of The Gambia .

Our Diaspora strategy seeks to explore and utilize the skills, talent and
resources of Gambians everywhere for the successful implementation of the
National Development Plan.

The Gambia's experience demonstrates that democracy yields amazing
dividends. Remarkably, we have noticed a decrease in the number of youths

attempting to undertake dangerous journeys across the Mediterranean to
Europe. The average Gambian is willing to stay in the country and contribute
to national development. Despite these positive developments, 1 strongly urge
that interventions to curb youth migration be supported through incentives. On
account of this, we look forward to the High-Level Conference in Marrakesh,
Morocco in December, 2018 to adopt the new Global Compact on Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration.

Better educational and job opportunities must be harnessed for the youth in
order to inspire them and give them hope in life.

In this regard, my government stands ready to work collaboratively with the
United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and other regional blocs to
devise and implement suitable strategies and interventions.
Madam President,

As a member of the Sahel region, The Gambia fully supports the

impleimentation of the new United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel
anchored in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel - UNISS.

We are optimistic that it will contribute significantly to addressing the
challenges of development in the Sahel, as well as fostering peace, security and
cross-border relations.

We are particularly excited that the new strategy views the Sahel as a land of
opportunities, and not one of hopelessness. In light of this, we envisage that
this strategy will yield important dividends for Africa, especially towards the
maintenance of peace and security and the elimination of terrorism in the
region.

Strategically, we must disrupt all criminal networks and the financing of transhuman crimes through better information sharing and cross-border security
initiatives.

Madam President,

As we battle these negative forces and try to fulfill our aspiration of silencing
the gun on the African continent by 2020, we are worried about the state of
United Nations Peacekeeping missions in some of our trouble spots, especially
in view of the drastic cuts to the peacekeeping budget.

The unavailability of the critical resources required to support peacekeepers is
quite worrisome. The Gambia supports the introduction of appropriate reforms
to strengthen the UN's capacity for both peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and
these should be reconsidered and maintained as important priorities on the
organization's agenda.

My government proposes that we do better to protect the lives of not only
innocent civilians but also the men and

women who constitute the

peacekeepers.

At this juncture, let me seize the opportunity to pay tribute to all the gallant
peacekeepers who have fallen. W^e call on our partners to rise up to the
challenge, and stop the protraction of all conflicts. Consequently, we support
the Secretary-General's agenda for reform.
Madam President,

As Africans, we must assume leadership for maintaining peace and security on

our continent. In this respect, I commend the leaders of Ethiopia and Eritrea for
the extraordinary efforts made to bring lasting peace to the Horn of Africa.
They have set an example for the rest of the continent to emulate.
In a similar vein, I applaud the leaders of South Sudan for agreeing to restore
peace, and work towards developing their country.
5 I i' 5 g e

We call on the leaders of Libya and Central African Republic to intensify their
efforts through political dialogue for national reconciliation and peace.
Madam President,

My government reaffirms its strong support for the two-state solution to
establish peace between the Palestinians and their neighbors. Related to this, we
pronounce our unconditional recognition of the One-China Policy. Similarly,
we recognize the support provided by the Government and People of
Bangladesh to address the plight of the Rohingya Muslims.

As the upcoming Chair of the next OIC Summit, The Gambia has undertaken,
through a Resolution, to champion an accountability mechanism that would
ensure that perpetrators of the terrible crimes against the Rohingya Muslims are
brought to book.
Madam President,

While it is our strong desire to see a reform that allows the Secretary-General

to operate efficiently, it is equally expected that the reform also facilitates the
successful implementation of the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development
goals.
Madam President,

Reform of the United Nations Security Council is long overdue. I wish to call

that the process truly reflects all interests and positions represented in the inter
governmental negotiations.

We are convinced that Africa's voice needs to be fully represented on the UN
Security Council.
Madam President,

My delegation looks forward to a successful 73*^ Session, and we hope that your
election will solidify the platform to highlight the plight of rural women and
girls during the Session.

6 I P '1

Madam President,

Before I conclude, let me express sincere condolences to the family of former
UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan. Mr. Annan was a formidable voice on
everything, including reform of the United Nations. He stood for a 'just' world,
and was a passionate advocate of good governance and fundamental freedoms.
Kofi Annan will surely be greatly missed.
I thank you all.

7I P

