GHANA

Permanent Mission of Ghana
TO THE United Nations
19 East 47th Street

New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel. 212-832-1300 • Fax 212-751-6743

★
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

STATEMENT BY
THE PRESIDENT OF

THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA,
H.E. NANA ADDO DANKWA AKUFO-ADDO
AT

THE 73RD SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ON

WEDNESDAY, 26™ SEPTEMBER, 2018
NEW YORK

Madam President, Secretary-General, Your Excellencies,

Ghana salutes the historical significance of your election to preside over

this 73"" session of the General Assembly as the first female Latin
American, and congratulates you most heartily, Madam President. Your

election reinforces our common preoccupation that gender equality must
be a central feature of the global agenda.
Madam President, thirteen days ago, we laid to rest in his home soil of

Ghana, Kofi Annan, the 7"^ Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
first from sub-Saharan Africa to occupy this exalted position. On behaif of
the peopie and government of Ghana, I wish to extend our heartfelt
gratitude to the United Nations Secretariat, led by the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Antonio Guterres, and the whole world community for the
outpouring of grief and condolences that we received on the passing of
Kofi Annan. We were deeply touched that so many world leaders and
peopie took the trouble to come to Accra to bid him farewell.

Kofi Annan's passionate and profound belief in the United Nations, and his
certainty that a better organised and stronger UN would make the world a
better place, is an ideal that should not be allowed to die.

Today, we continue to be faced with the stark reality that resolutions,
norms and any number of votes in the Security Council and General
Assembly mean nothing without the political will to enforce them. We are

still to come to terms with what the role of our organization should be.
Should it just be a club of nation states that exists to look after their own
interests? What of its constitution by "we the peoples", as declared in its

founding document? Does the theme we have chosen for this assembly
have any relevance in real life, and do we want to make the United Nations

relevant to all people? Do we want an organization that ensures shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies? Or should

It remain the place to pass resolutions that are ignored with impunity?

2 IPa g e

Madam President, when some of the nations of the world gathered in
San Francisco 73 years ago, and signed the landmark document that
created this organization, it was a very different world from what we have
today.

And I do not refer only to the difference in the numbers in the room on
that occasion, nor the difference in the mode of travel that brought the
leaders to that meeting and the jet planes that have brought us all to New
York this week. Nor do I refer to the tweets by which we communicate

now, and the elegant handwriting that they employed back in 1945.1 refer
to the theme we have drawn up for this General Assembly, and wonder if it
would have been comprehensible to that group in San Francisco.

It is a different world we currently live in, and we should accept that this
organization must change to suit contemporary needs.
Madam President, ten years ago as the General Assembly was starting
its proceedings, the world was plunged into a financial crisis. The first
scenes of that crisis were played out on a street not far from where we are
gathered, but the consequences were felt and are still being felt around
the world, and in small countries like Ghana. Some say that upheaval lies
at the heart of the change in politics and outlook around the world. Today,
as we speak, a trade war is being stoked between the two largest
economies of the world. The consequences will affect those who have had
no say, including small countries like Ghana.
These events provide proof, if some were needed, that ours is an
interdependent world. We in Ghana (and other parts of the African
continent) are determined to pull our country out of poverty and Into
prosperity.

We do not think that a nation needs to remain poor or become poor for
others to become prosperous. We believe that there is room, and there are
enough resources on this planet for us all to be prosperous. But it does
mean that the rules and regulations that we fashion to guide our dealings
3 1P a g e

with each other have to be respected by all of us. From the environment to

trading rules, we have to accept that there cannot be different set of rules
for different countries. Thus far, the United Nations provides the best
vehicle for all nations to address their aspirations and challenges. Ghana

has always displayed her belief In the United Nations and sought to
contribute her share In making the organization a successful one.
We have embraced the SDGs and Integrated the seventeen ambitious goals
Into our national vision and budget. We Intend that Ghana will In July 2019,
take her turn to present our Voluntary National Review during the ECOSOC
High-level Political Forum, and we will share our successes and challenges
as well as opportunities for new and continuing partnerships.

Madam President, It Is Important to reiterate that advocating for a world
order In which all countries sign up to obey the rules does not mean that
we want uniformity. We take pride In what distinguishes us as Africans and
as Ghanaians.

55% of the work of the Security Council last year had to do with Africa.
Unfortunately, this Invariably meant peacekeeping and poverty related
Issues. We no longer want to be the place that requires peacekeepers and
poverty fighting NGOs, no matter how noble their motives. Our regional
bodies, like ECOWAS, and our continental body, the AU, are making

systematic efforts, despite significant handicaps, to bring peace and
stability to the entire continent, and, sooner rather than later, they will
succeed.

We know we must get our population educated and trained, and we are
setting about It. We must address our Infrastructural deficit. The traditional
methods of tackling this problem will not provide the answer. We are
looking for new ways to resolve It. Ghana, like many countries In Africa, Is
4 IPa ge

forging relations with China to make arrangements to help address part of
our infrastructure deficit.

This is not a uniquely Ghanaian or African phenomenon. It has not been
lost on us that the developed, rich and weii-estabiished countries have
been paying regular visits to China, and seeking to open new economic ties
and improve upon existing ones. It is also not lost on us that a lot of
anxiety is being expressed about the possibility of a recoionization of the
African continent by a new power. We should, indeed, learn from history.

It was at the turn of the 20"' century that China's first railways were built
by Western companies, financed by Western loans to a nearly bankrupt
Qing Dynasty, and it was under those circumstances that a certain
strategic port called Hong Kong was leased for 99 years, and the rest, as
the saying goes, is history.

Today, the former victim of Western Railways imperialism is lending billions
to countries throughout Asia, Africa and Europe to construct not only
railroads, but also highways, ports, power plants and other infrastructure,
and many businesses.
The historical echoes are certainly worrisome, but, yes, surely, we must
and can learn from history.

We, in Ghana, must build roads, bridges, railways, ports, schools, hospitals,
and we must create jobs to keep our young people engaged. It is obvious
to us that the development trajectory we had been on for many decades is
not working. We are trying a different one, and we would appreciate the
support and goodwill of the world, especially in helping to stem the huge
flow of iiiicit funds from the continent.

It is in everybody's interest that we, who are counted amongst the poor of
the world, make a rapid transformation from poverty to prosperity. We are
determined in Ghana, and, increasingly, in more and more parts of Africa,
5 IPa g e

to chart our own paths to prosperity, and pay our own way in the worid.
We are no ionger interested in being a burden on others. We will shoulder
our own responsibilities and build societies and nations that will be
attractive to our youth. We have the necessary sense of enterprise,
creativity, innovation and hard work to engineer this transition. Hence, our
vision of a Ghana Beyond Aid, indeed, of an Africa Beyond Aid.
Madam President, it is equally important that the United Nations is
reformed to be able to preside over this changed and changing world to
which we all aspire. The powerful nations must be willing to adapt to the

changes to make our worid a better place. After all, we ail inhabit the same
planet, and we ail owe the same duty of care to ensure its survival. The
African Common Position on UN Reform, as expressed in the Ezulwini

Consensus, remains the most comprehensive proposal for reform of the
United Nations, particularly of the Security Council. It is time the global
community endorsed it to create a modern United Nations fit for purpose in
our time.

May God bless the United Nations and us all.
I thank you for your attention.

6 IPa g e

