STATEMENT

by

His Excellency Mr. Carl B. Greenidge
Vice President and Minister of Foreign Affairs
Cooperative Republic of GUYANA
at the
SEVENTY-THIRD SESSION OF THE

UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Friday, September 28, 2018

UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS

Please check against delivery

Mr/Madame President, I thank you.
I am pleased to extend warmest congratulations to Foreign Minister Maria
Fernanda Espinosa Garces and the people of Ecuador on the occasion of her

preferment to the Presidency of our august Assembly. That election is all
the more gratifying because Mme Espinosa represents the Latin America and
the Caribbean region. She joins a small but distinguished group of women

who have presided over the Assembly during the 72 years of its history.

Guyana pledges its unwavering support to Mme President as she discharges
her responsibilities.

Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to your distinguished
predecessor,

His

Excellency Mr.

Miroslav Lajcak,

for

his

successful

stewardship of the seventy-second session of the Assembly. Thirdly, 1
would like to take a moment to salute the memory of former SecretaryGeneral Mr. Kofi Annan, a son of Africa and a servant of the peoples of the
world, whose dedication to the global community was epitomized in a
lifetime of selfless service to the United Nations.

Madame President,

Guyana is persuaded of the value of multilateralism (sometimes termed

liberal

multilateralism)

within

which

Guyana

has

operated

since

independence. This rules-based system with a pivotal role for nation States

alongside key international and multilateral institutions is valued by
Member States. It is largely predictable, based on the rule of law and has

enabled extensive economic development and improvements in human
welfare across the globe since its establishment after the 1939-45 War.
In spite of that success, multilateralism is now under attack in some

quarters and there have been recent calls for it to be replaced. Some of the

challenges feeding such calls are obvious. The rapid expansion in the
number of States over the last few decades has contributed to the

exponential growth in the number and complexity of decision-making in the
Page 1 of 8

system. The consequences of the latter have been most evident in some of

the very areas in which global multilateral governance have had the greatest
success in the past - trade, economic growth and peaceful resolution of

conflicts. At the UN we are faced with stymied Security Council reform.
The debate about the reforms needed to move us forward and out of this

impending cul-de-sac has yielded many ideas. But rather than turning to
outdated models, solutions based on misconceived economic goals, or some

form of national exceptionalism, we need to explore complementary
organizational forms and arrangements that could simplify decisionmaking. In attempts to look outside of the box for solutions some observers

have turned to the idea of the inclusion of new partners, such as NGOs and

social networks working alongside states and governments and/or some
degree of regionalization of organizational structures etc - the so-called

'Web 2.0' option. It may also be worth exploring other voting rules for
decision-making. In other words, we need to fashion a more equitable and
just variant of multilateralism rather than its replacement.
Serious proposals

should

seek to

preserve

the valued elements of

multilateralism because the more intractable problems we face are beyond
the capacity of individual States to solve. It is small wonder then that the

Secretary-General in his report on the work of the Organization asserts that

the United Nations offers a platform where Member States, regional
organizations and civil society can find solutions to global problems that no

nation acting alone can resolve. Working together is not optional. It is the

only answer. Guyana therefore pledges its full support, [Madame] Mr.

President, for your strategic vision of "Dialogue and the Strengthening of
Multilateralism as a Catalyst for the well-being of All Persons in a
Sustainable Planet".

Madame President,

Page 2 of 8

Global governance and peace are inextricably linked. In that regard Guyana
has noted with satisfaction the efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres,

in close collaboration with Member States,

to reform and

streamline the machinery of the United Nations to make it more fit for

purpose. We fully support the reform of the peace and security pillar with
its emphasis on preventive diplomacy. Peace is also inextricably linked to
sustainable development. In this regard, the United Nations disarmament
agenda is a central tenet in our efforts to achieve a stable, secure and

peaceful world order. Guyana has demonstrated its commitment to this
agenda most recently in its signing and ratification of the Treaty for the

Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

We recognize,

however,

that the

commitment of every Member State to the disarmament agenda is key to
achieving the world to which we aspire and the onus is on all of us to fulfill
the obligations we have taken on ourselves by becoming States Parties to
the various legal instruments concerned with questions of disarmament and
non-proliferation.

For Guyana and the wider Caribbean, the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and their associated ammunition poses one of the most serious

threats to human security and sustainable development. International drug
trafficking, transnational organized crime, unregulated cyber space, and the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons divert resources that could
otherwise be invested in other critical areas.

We believe that with effective

international cooperation and assistance, small countries like Guyana can
tackle this illicit trade and ultimately create safer communities, safer
countries and regions, and a safer world.

Madame President,

Page 3 of 8

Adherence to the cardinal principles of the sovereign equality of States,
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, and the
peaceful resolution of disputes are the most effective guarantees of peace.
You will no doubt be aware of the controversy that has arisen between
Guyana and its neighbor Venezuela over the latter's contention that the
Arbitral Award of 1899 that settled the boundaries between the

two

countries is null and void. On 30 January 2018, Secretary-General Guterres

took the decision that the controversy with the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela should be referred to the International Court of Justice. The

decision of the Secretary-General is binding on the parties.

Accordingly, in March of this year, Guyana filed its application in the Court
seeking an affirmation of the validity of the 1899 Arbitral Award and the

international boundary that it established. Unfortunately, notwithstanding
its obligation to do so, Venezuela has thus far refused to participate in the

proceedings. Guyana sincerely hopes that it will change its mind. There is

still time for it to do so. Guyana wishes to express its gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his important contribution to the resolution of this
longstanding matter and looks forward to a final judgment by the
International Court of Justice. The rule of law must prevail.

As a responsible member of the global community, Guyana seeks peace not

only in our region, but throughout the world where the scourge of war and
conflict are an obstacle to development. They divert attention away from
the pressing problems of development and the enhancement of human well-

being. In the Middle East, the region of the world that has given birth to the

three great monotheistic religions of our age, we reiterate our call for a twoState solution to the generational conflict between the peoples of Palestine

Page 4 of 8

and Israel. These two peoples have much to gain by living side by side in
peace. The people of Palestine, including the inhabitants of Gaza, like

people everywhere have a right to life, to a dignified existence and to their
own homeland.

Similarly, Madame President, we deplore the suffering being borne by the
Rohingya population. We call on the international community to take the
necessary steps to ensure respect of the human rights of the affected

population. At the same time, we salute the efforts of Bangladesh to provide
a safe haven for the refugee population, with the assistance of international
agencies.

Closer home, in the Caribbean Region, we again join the overwhelming
majority of the international community in calling for the removal of the

trade and economic embargo against our sister Caribbean nation of Cuba,
which frustrates the right of the Cuban people to development and material
well-being.
Madame President,

Guyana also welcomes the measures being taken to reposition the United
Nations Development System in order to better align its functioning with

the goals set out in the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. We accept
that repositioning is a shared responsibility and Guyana is committed to
doing its part.
Madame President,
Page 5 of 8

Guyana has fully embraced the holistic and people-centred approach to
development set out in the Sustainable Development Goals and our nation is
currently engaged in efforts to mainstream and integrate those Goals into
our national development strategy known as the Green State Development
Strategy. The GSDS seeks to ensure that development is not achieved at the
expense of the environment and to wean Guyana away from its current near-

total dependence on non-renewable sources of energy. We are turning to
renewable sources, such as hydroelectricity, wind, solar and biomass.
Guyana

is

unalterably

committed

to

the

principles

of

sustainable

development and to working with the international community and all
partners to help combat the impacts of climate change, including rising sea
levels. For this reason, Guyana strategy is to place emphasis on inclusive
transformation, sustainable natural resources, energy transition, resilient

infrastructure,
institutional

human

development

foundations

and

and

well-being,

international

government

cooperation,

trade

and
and

investment.

Madame President,

Guyana fully recognizes the necessary, nay critical, contribution of women and
girls to its sustainable development. Women and girls constitute more than half

the world's population and the underutilization of their potential represents a
serious loss of resources in the global effort to promote human development.
We are trying to ensure that the management of this development is

Page 6 of 8

undertaken with women and girls fully represented at the helm of decision-

making. We applaud the steps taken by the Secretary-General to ensure parity
in the appointment of senior managers of the Organization, including Resident
Coordinators in the field.

Madame President

I wish to express Guyana's satisfaction at the successful conclusion this year of
the intergovernmental negotiations of a Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration. The provisions of the Compact are consistent with the 2030
Agenda and the commitments made in the New York Declaration for Refugees.
It is our hope that this global framework will help to manage international
migration flows in all their dimensions for the benefit of all States, sending and

receiving, and of migrants themselves. Guyana looks forward to the successful
adoption of the Global Compact in the intergovernmental conference to be held
in December 2018 in Marrakesh, Morocco.

Madame President,

We meet this year in disconcerting times. Our planet, the only one we have,
faces grave threats on multiple fronts, including threats to the very
existence of life as we know it. As 1 have already hinted, there are many who
question whether our Organization, the Nations of the world United, will be

able to unite our strength to maintain international peace and security,

while promoting social progress and better standards of life in larger
freedom and reaffirming faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
Page 7 of 8

and worth of the human person, and in the equal rights of men and women.
It is for us to decide and to summon the will to work towards those ends.

Our children and our children's children will judge us. Guyana reaffirms its
strong resolution to doing its part within the limits of our capacity and
resources.

I thank you.

Page 8 of 8

