INDU

Check Against Delivery

General Debate
of the

73"^^ United Nations General Assembly

Statement

by
Minister of External Affairs

Smt. Sushma Swaraj

29 September 2018

Permanent Mission of India to the United Nations

235 East 43rd Street, New York, NY 10017 • Tel: (212) 490-9660 • Fax: (212) 490-9656
E-Mail: india@un.int

Your Excellency Madam President,

May I begin by congratulating you on your election as the
President of the 73^^ session of the United Nations General

Assembly, on my personal behalf as well as on behalf of my
country, India. As a woman, I feel doubly proud that you have
this honour. I also recall, with equal pride, that the first woman
to occupy this eminent chair was an Indian Smt. Vijayalakshmi
Pandit, in 1953 during the 8^^ session. I will also like to thank
the outgoing President Mr. Miroslav Lajcak for successfully
conducting the 72"^ session of the United Nations General
Assembly.

Madam President,

The United
organization:

Nations

is

the

world's

premier

multilateral

1: where nations seek balm for the wounds of history, and a
platform for solutions.
2: where less developed nations sit with their more fortunate
brethren to formulate plans that can correct the skewered
economic imbalance.

3: where new goals are set, and route maps defined, to make our
world a better place.
In 2015, we established 2030 as a critically important horizon
for 17 Sustainable Development Goads. A common refrain, from
2015, has been that we will reach that horizon only if India finds
its way to this destination. Otherwise, we shall fail.

I assure this august gathering through you. Madam, that India

will not let you fail. We are totally committed to achieving these
objectives for our own people. Under the leadership of Prime

Minister Narendra Modi, India has initiated unprecedented
economic and social transformation that will help India achieve
its SDG goals much before time.

Let me offer a few glimpses of evidence to illustrate what is the
world's biggest exercise in poverty elimination and social
transformation:

Through

the

Jan

Dhan Yojana,

world's

largest financial

inclusion scheme, over 320 million Indians, who had never
crossed the door of a bank before, now have bank accounts.
This has enabled the poor to receive allotments from the

government's welfare programmes into their personal accounts,
through Direct Benefit Transfer, which has ended waste and
corruption in the system.

Similarly, A3rushman Bharat, the world's biggest health
insurance programme, was launched by Prime Minister Modi a
few days ago on 23rd September. This revolutionary scheme will
benefit 500 million Indians, who will get an insurance cover of
Rs 500,000 per family per year. We have a prayer in India: Sarve
Santu Niramaya, which means, all should be healthy. The
Aayushman Bharat Yojana is the answer to this prayer.

Similarly, we have launched the largest housing scheme in the
world aimed at ensuring that everyone has a roof above their
heads. Under the scheme, we have set ourselves a target of

nearly 21 million homes by 2022. So far, over five million homes
for the poor have already been constructed.

Similarly, two extremely effective schemes have been initiated to
raise the skill levels of those waiting to be employed through

Skill Development Programme and to turn the poor into
entrepreneurs, through the Mudra Programme. I want to stress
that over 140 million Indians have taken Mudra loans. The most

significant aspect of Mudra scheme is

that 76% of the

beneficiaries are women.

At the heart of Prime Minister Modi's transformative vision is a

radical idea: that the uplift of any nation is best achieved
through the all-round empowerment of women. All the schemes
that I have just spoken about have the welfare of women at their
core. Last yeeir, I spoke about the Ujjawala scheme, in which I
am happy to report 50 million free gas connections have been
provided so far.

Another such initiative is the Maternity Benefit Scheme, in
which women get 26 weeks of paid leave to care for their
newborn. Madame President, as a woman, you will understand
better than most how vitally important this programme is for
every mother. Some developed nations with huge economies do
not offer more than six weeks paid leave, leading to a continuing
struggle for more time off. In India, we have implemented what
women across the world need.

Madam President,

In 2022, free India will be 75 years old. Prime Minister Narendra
Modi has pledged to build a New India by then. This New India
will be:

1: Swachh Bharat, Swasth Bharat (Clean India, Healthy India);
2: Samarth Bharat, Surakshit Bharat (Prosperous India, Secure
India);

3: Shikshit Bharat, Viksit Bharat (Educated India, Developed
India);

4: Urjawan Bharat, Shaktiman Bharat (Energised India, Strong
India).
That is our horizon for India in 2022. We will reach that horizon.

Madam President,

The biggest challenge of our era comes from the existential
threats of climate change and terrorism.

Under-developed and developing nations are the worst victim of
climate change.
They have neither the capacity nor the
resources to meet this crisis. Those who have exploited nature
for their immediate needs cannot abdicate their responsibilities.
If we have to save the world from the adverse effects of climate

change, then developed nations must lift the deprived with
financial and technical resources. The principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities was
reiterated in the 2015 Paris Agreement.

India has risen to meet the challenge of climate change. Prime
Minister Modi in partnership with France launched the
International Solar Alliance. The United Nations has recognized
their contributions and conferred on Prime Minister Modi and

President Macron the honour of UN Champions of the Earth. 1
am happy to inform you that 68 nations are now members of
ISA. In March this year, India and France chaired the Founding
Conference of ISA in which 120 countries participated.
Our Prime Minister has described his vision of Sustainable and

available energy in a typically apt phrase: One Sun, One Grid.

This breakthrough concept can become the solution we seek to
the problems.

Madam President,
I had described terrorism as the second existential threat to

humanity. We imagined that the arrival of the 21st Century
would bring with it an age of common good, defined by
cooperation in the quest for peace and prosperity. But here in
New York, the horrific tragedy of 9/11, and in Mumbai the
catastrophe of 26 /11 became the nightmares that shattered our
dreams. The demon of terrorism now stalks the world, at a
faster pace somewhere, a slower pace elsewhere, but lifethreatening everywhere.

In our case, terrorism is bred not in some faraway land, but
across our border to the west. Our neighbour's expertise is not
restricted to spawning grounds for terrorism; it is also an expert
in trying to mask malevolence with verbal duplicity.

The most stairtling evidence of this duplicity was the fact that
Osama Bin Laden, the architect and ideologue of 9/11 was given
safe haven in Pakistan. America had declared Osama bin Laden

it's most dangerous enemy, and launched an exhaustive,
worldwide search to bring him to justice. What America perhaps
could not comprehend was that Osama would get sanctuary in a
country that claimed to be America's friend and ally: Pakistan.
Eventually, America's intelligence services discovered the truth

of this hypocrisy, and its special forces delivered justice. But
Pakistan continued to behave as if nothing had happened.
Pakistan's commitment to terrorism as an instrument of official

policy has not abated one bit. Neither has its belief in hypocrisy.

The killers of 9/11 met their fate; but the mastermind of 26/11
Haiiz Saeed still roams the streets of Pakistan with impunity.
What is heartening is that the world is no longer ready to believe
Islamabad. FATF, for instance, has put Pakistan on notice over
terror funding.

Madam President,

We are accused of sabotaging the process of talks. This is a
complete lie. We believe that talks are the only rational means to
resolve the most complex of disputes. Talks with Pakistan have
begun many times. If they stopped, it was only because of
Paikistan's behavior. There have been many governments in
India, by many different parties. Each government has tried the
peace option. Prime Minister Modi, by inviting the Heads of the
SAARC nations, to his swearing in ceremony, began his attempt
for dialogue on his very first day in office. On 9^^ December
2016, I personally went to Islamabad and offered a
comprehensive bilateral dialogue.
But soon after, Pak
sponsored terrorists attacked our air force base in Pathankot on

2"<^ January. Please explain to me how we could pursue talks
in the midst of terrorist bloodshed? Even now, after the new
government came to power, the Prime Minister of Pakistan

Imran Khan wrote to Prime Minister Modi suggesting a meeting
between Foreign Ministers in New York.
We accepted the
proposal. But, within hours of our acceptance, news came that
terrorists had killed three of our jawans. Does this indicate a
desire for dialogue?

Time and again, Pakistan accuses India of human rights
violations. Who can be a greater transgressor of human rights
than

a

terrorist? Those who

take

innocent human

lives

in

pursuit of war by other means are defenders of inhuman

behavior, not of human rights. Pakistan glorifies killers; it
refuses to see the blood of innocents.

It has become something of a habit with Pakistan to throw the
dust of deceit and deception against India in order to provide
some thin cover for its own guilt. The United Nations has seen
this before. Last year, Pakistan's representative, using her right
to reply, displayed some photographs as "proof of "human
rights violations" by India. The photographs turned out to be
from another country. Similar false accusations have become a
part of its standard rhetoric.

Madam President,

Each year, for last five years, India has been arguing from this
podium that lists are not enough to check terrorists and their
protectors. We need to bring them to accountability through
international law.

In 1996, India proposed a draft document on CCIT at the United
Nations. Till today, that draft has remained a draft, because we
cannot agree on a common language. On the one hand, we want
to fight terrorism; on the other, we cannot define it. This is why
terrorists with a price on their head are celebrated , finances
and armed as liberation heroes by a country that remains a
member of the United Nations. Cruelty and barbarism are
advertised as heroism. The country prints postage stamps
glorifying terrorists. If we do not act now, we will have to deal
with conflagration later. Once again, 1 appeal to this August
body to come to an agreement, soon, on CCIT as one of the
necessary measures in a long running war.

Madam President,

I began by highlighting the unique and positive role of the UN:
but I must add that step by slow step, the importance,
influence, respect and value of this institution is beginning to
ebb. It is time to wonder if we are wandering towards the fate of
the League of Nations. If 2030 is the agreed deadline for delivery
on Sustainable Development Goals, then it also marks hundred
years of the lapse of the League into irrelevance. Surely there is
something to learn from this coincidence? The League went into
meltdown because it was unwilling to accept the need for
reform. We must not make that mistake.

The United Nations must accept that it needs fundamental
reform. Reform cannot be cosmetic. We need change the
institution's head and heart to make both compatible to
contemporary reality.

Reform must begin today; tomorrow could be too late. If the UN

is ineffective, the whole concept of multilateralism will collapse.
In

this

session,

multilateralism.

there

We

will

has

been

never

much

weaken

debate
the

about

multilateral

mechanism. India believes that the world is a family, and the
best mecins of resolution is shared discourse. A family is shaped
by love and is not transactional; a family is nurtured by
consideration not greed; a family believes in harmony not
jealousy. Greed breeds conflict; consideration leads to
resolution. That is why the United Nations must be based on the

principles of the family. The UN cannot be run by the T, it only
works by the We'.

India does not believe that the United Nations should become

the instrument of a few at the cost of the many. India believes

that we must move forward together or we sink into the swamp
of stagnation.

Madam President,

This year India will celebrate the 150th birth anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi. The Mahatma's favourite bhajan was
"Vaishnav Jan to tene Kahiye". The essence is deeply moving
and quintessentially important: He who understands the pain of
another, and absorbs it as his own, is a good human being. He
who sees this pain, aind helps without becoming arrogant, is a
good human being'.

Madam President,

We have to
understanding,
understand the
nations to ease
in our scheme

make this assembly into a platform of
assistance and true justice. We have to
pain of other nations, and work with developed
and eliminate this pain. Arrogance has no place
of things; arrogance is counter-productive and

self-defeating. Let us work for the benefit of the less fortunate.
Let us work for a world where there is peace, serenity and
shared prosperity; a world that is free from terrorism, tension
and violence.

It is with this wish in mind that 1 end with a shloka from our

Sanskrit scriptures:

May all experience well being;

May all experience peace;

May all move towards perfection;
May all enjoy prosperity;
May all achieve serenity.
Thank you. Madam President.

