Check a ainst delivery

STATEMENT

BY THE HEAD OF DELEGATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA

AT THE GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE 73RD SESSION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Making the United Nations reievant to ail people:
global leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful,
equitable, and sustainable societies"

NEW YORK, SEPTEMBER 29, 2018

Madame President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

I join others in congratulating Her Excellency Maria Fernanda Espinosa
on her election as the President of the Seventy-Third Session of the
General Assembly.

Rest assured, Madame President, Indonesia will give its full support for
the success of your Presidency.

I also congratulate His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, for his success in
guiding the Seventy-Second session.

Let me also extend our deepest sympathies and condolences on the
passing of the Former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
The world has lost a great peacemaker and true humanist.... We will
always remember his legacy.
Madame President,

The world continues to face complex global challenges.
Where instabilities and conflicts are still rampant.
Extreme poverty and inequalities linger.
Zero-sum thinking and narrow-nationalism often prevail.

And democracy and human rights violations still become day-to-day
problems in our life.
In times like this, we often mistakenly look to leadership that only has great
strength... a leadership that has superhero-like power.

However, Madame President, the world does not need to look far for
superheroes.

We do not need to call on the strength of the Avengers... nor that of the
Justice League.

We in this room are global leaders.
Collectively, we have the strength of superheroes. What we must do is
harness our own individual will, courage, strength, compassion,
selflessness, and humility.

This is the very essence the of United Nations.
Where we all believe in the strength and power of the mantra in the UN
Charter, We the peoples of the United Nations .
As Global leaders -young and old... women and men we must work

together... to encourage others... in achieving the goals and objectives of

the United Nations.
This year s theme precisely captures what needs to be done by all of us...
as a community of nations.... A community of leaders.

The message is loud and clear.

Pursuing peace, equality, and sustainability for our people requires
global leadership and shared responsibility. There is no effective
leadership without genuine responsibility, and vice versa.
My FIRST point, global leadership and responsibility determine the
outcome of our quest for lasting peace.

Peace is not merely the absence of war It is also about the
commitment to peace.

It is nothing other than continuous efforts to maintain stability and prevent
conflict... from which we begin our pursuit of happiness.

But this must start with genuine leadership.
It must start first at home.... and in our own respective region.

In our surroundings... to create an ecosystem of peace, stability, and
prosperity.

Indonesia will always believe in this way of thinking.

In doing so, of course, we cannot do it alone. .

This is why as an elected non-permanent member of UN Security Council
next year, we will need your continued support.
We are grateful for your trust and confidence... and we will do our best to
become your true partner for peace.
Madame President,

For the last five decades, we have enjoyed a long peace dividend in the
Asia Pacific region.
Since geopolitical and geostrategic landscapes are changing so fast,
Indonesia sees the opportunity to also extend it to the larger Indo-Pacific
region.

Along with other ASEAN countries, we put forward an outlook of the Indian
and Pacific regions as a single geostrategic theatre.
A region of cooperation, not competition... to support a greater global
ecosystem of peace.

Madame President,

The commitment and responsibility to peace must be replicated across all
regions, including in the Middle East.
Central to peace and stability in the Middle East is the long-standing
question of Palestine.
Our commitment to peace will be questioned if we cannot resolve the
Palestinian-lsraeli conflict.
Setbacks continue to persist as we speak.

Imminent threat to the status quo of Jerusalem... millions of Palestinian
refugees are at stake... humanitarian situation is getting worst day by day.
The current situation does not only harm the peace process...

It destroys the hopes of the Palestinian people... the hopes of all of us....

for an Independent Palestinian State.
International community can no longer remain in a standstill.

We must call for an immediate negotiation that can make the two-state
solution a reality.

Indonesia will continue to stand with the people of Palestine... until the
day Palestine is truly independent.

Madame President,
At the global level, Indonesia is honored to have contributed to
Peacekeeping.

Indonesia has now contributed more than 3,500 personnel in 9 UN
Missions, as the 8th largest Troop/Police Contributing Country.
We will not stop there. We are ready to contribute 4,000 peacekeepers
by 2019, with increasing proportion of female peacekeepers.
Beyond numbers, we believe that the UN Peacekeeping Operations
should continue to be the UN s flagship enterprise.
But it can only be achieved by improving its capacity in delivering its
mandate. That is why we have endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration.
Madame President,

I will begin my SECO D point with a question -after peace is achieved,
will that peace be enough?
Peace should not be an end in itself.
It must create an environment conducive for development. Peace and

development must go hand in hand as they are mutually reinforcing.
Only then can peace bring benefits for our people.

It is for this reason that development goals and commitments were agreed
upon.

2030 Agenda and Paris Agreement on Climate Change are two obvious
examples.

Another milestone has also been reached. The first ever global instrument
on migration will be adopted in Marrakesh in December.
Those agreements represent global leadership and shared
responsibilities for a better future... where no one is left behind.
No matter big or small... North or South... Developed or Developing
countries.

In short... these agreements shows our collective compassion, and
selflessness... Global leadership at its finest.

The next questions - how are we going to live up to those commitments?
The answer is that global leaderships needs to create conducive
environment to achieve these commitments.

Very simple on paper, but not so straightforward in practice.
Three years after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, many success stories
have been reached.

However, result and progress may vary in different parts of the world.
Lingering conflicts, instability, protectionism and uncertain global
economic outlook still hamper our common efforts to achieve the SDGs.
Regrettably, time is not on our side.
Some of the SDGs targets are running behind the schedule.
To overcome this, the pace of implementation must be accelerated.

Decisive actions must be taken to improve access for financing, capacity
building and technology.

Global leadership and partnership must be pursued to reach win-win
future .

Madame President,

As part of our global leadership and responsibility, Indonesia has taken
concrete steps to implement our commitments.

Through South-South and Triangular Cooperation, Indonesia has offered
more than 500 capacity building programs with more than 6,000
participants across the globe....

from Asia to Africa
from the South Pacific to the Caribbean.
We will soon launch the Indonesia Aid for Development to reinforce the
delivery of our international assistance.
Moreover, earlier this year... Indonesia hosted the first ever IndonesiaAfrica Forum.... as a testament of our strong commitment to promote “win-

win cooperation with the African continent.
Further, as a follow-up, we will convene Indonesia-Africa Infrastructure
Dialogue next year.... focusing on infrastructure.. , to accelerate

development in Africa.

As the largest archipelagic country in the world, we are fully aware on the
adverse impact of climate change as it is mostly faced by Small Islands
Development States.

The convening of the Archipelagic and Islands States Conference and Our
Ocean Conference next month are proof of our firm leadership and
commitment in addressing this matter.
Madame President,

Peace and development will only be sustained if we have an equitable
society.

This leads me to my THIRD point on creating a society that is just,
inclusive, democratic and respectful of human rights.

An equitable, tolerant, and moderate society is key in addressing major
challenges of violent extremism and radicalism.

Injustice, exclusivity, extreme poverty, illiteracy and massive youth
unemployment must be uprooted.
Hard and soft power approaches must be improved.
For this reason, we have amended our national law and strengthened our

soft approach in adapting with new evolving challenges.
The last horrific terrorist attack in Surabaya, Indonesia, has shown that
the evolution of violence by terrorists knows no bounds.
Using children as weapons can never be right.

But this attack Will only strengthen our determination to work more closely
with international community.

Madam President,
To create peaceful, sustainable and equitable societies, all countries must
respect international law and principles of the UN, including respect for
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In this connection, Indonesia strongly deplores the attempts of one
country to support or even worst... become part of the separatist
movements.

This act of hostility has no place in the UN system.... An act which is
clearly in violation of UN principles.
For far too long... Indonesia has chosen to build friendly relations with this
particular country, including in showing our solidarity and sympathy during
difficult time.
But when such hostile acts continue... Indonesia will not remain silent.

Indonesia will not let any country undermine its territorial inte rit .
Like any other sovereign country, Indonesia will firmly defend its
territorial integrity... I repeat: will firmly defend its territorial integrity.

To conclude... Madam President, I would like to reiterate that peaceful,
equitable and sustainable societies require a more responsive,
responsible, and credible United Nations.

We in the United Nation must show leadership.
This is why the UN reform is inevitable.
Otherwise... the UN will be obsolete to answer the needs and challenges
of today and tomorrow.

The goal of the UN reform is crystal clear.
It must be better positioned to help countries sustain peace and achieve
the SDGs.
All of us has a role to play. ...to keep the UN relevant... and to ensure that

the UN delivers.
Indonesia stands ready to contribute to this noble goal for the sake
of humanity.
I thank you.

0O0

Word count: 1628 (16 menit)

