CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Address by H.E. Mr. Shinzo Abe, Prime Minister of Japan,
at the Seventy-Third Session of the United Nations General Assembly
September 25, 2018
[Provisional translation]

Serving as a flag bearer for free trade
Clearing away Northeast Asia’s postwar structure
Promoting the “Free and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy”
Inviting teachers from Gaza
Japan and the Japanese looking intently at the future

Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen,
I have been accorded the privilege of continuing to serve as Japan’s
helmsman for the next three years. As I address the General Assembly
today for the sixth consecutive year, I do so with a feeling of renewed
resolve.
In the three years to come, I will do my very best to strengthen the free
trade system. I will likewise do everything in my power to clear the
postwar structure from Northeast Asia.

Serving as a flag bearer for free trade

In my view, the Japanese people have eagerly hoped for their national
leaders to serve as flag bearers for free trade. This is because after the
war, Japan itself was a nation that enjoyed remarkable growth, basking
1/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
in the advantages of trade as the beneficiary of a free and open
economic system.
The free trade system enabled the countries of Asia, one after the other,
to achieve take-off and fostered the middle class in each of these
countries. In the background was the large-scale direct investment
Japan has made in these countries since the 1980s.
In all these cases, this was possible thanks to the international
economic system being rules-based, free, and open.
Should Japan, the country that reaped the greatest benefits of all under
this system, ever fail to support maintaining and strengthening that
system, who else should we wait for to rise in support of it? Japan’s
responsibility is tremendous indeed.
That is also Japan’s mission, rooted in its own history.
Other than coal that supported modern Japan’s industrialization, our
nation has had no other resources to speak of. But upon devoting itself
to reaping the blessings of trade, post-war Japan succeeded in realizing
growth that was called a miracle, even though it lacked resources.
The very first country to prove through its own experience the principle
that exists between trade and growth -- a principle that has now
become common sense -- was Japan. Japan has now taken on the
mission of imparting to the world the benefits of trade.
I have at times risen above intense debates domestically, waving the
flag of free trade. There has been no greater joy for me than when
TPP11, took final shape and was quickly approved by our Diet. In
addition, Japan and the European Union have signed an Economic
2/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Partnership Agreement that is of a scale and scope worthy of special
mention in world history.
But that said, we must not be complacent. I must drive my efforts up a
notch, aiming still farther into the distance.
In addition to Japan’s commitment to the World Trade Organization,
which is a given, I will make all-out efforts towards negotiations on the
“RCEP,” which will give rise to an enormous free-trade area in East
Asia.
And, more than anything else, I value our new trade talks with the
United States, dubbed the “FFR” trade talks.
For many a year, both Japan and the United States have led the free
trade system forward internationally. As evidence of that, Japan’s
direct investment has created employment in the U.S. for some
856,000 people nationwide, a quantity second only to what the U.K.
has brought about.
At present, in contrast to the 1.74 million vehicles exported annually
from Japan to the United States, the number of Japanese cars
manufactured within the United States is 3.77 million.
This is a win-win situation at its finest. I intend for Japan and the
United States to continue this kind of relationship between us.
But this is hardly unique to our bilateral ties with the U.S. Under the
flag of free trade, Japan has with any country and any region built up
relations in which we each can be of assistance to the other. We will
continue to do this going forward.
3/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
In order to expand free and fair economic rules befitting to the 21st
century into the vast region extending from Asia and the Pacific to the
Indian Ocean, the countries that have created the system and reaped
the greatest benefits from that system -- that is to say, countries like
Japan -- must lead the effort. This is what I believe.

Clearing away Northeast Asia’s postwar structure

Just a few moments ago I stated that I will do everything in my power
to clear the long-standing postwar structure from Northeast Asia.
I am now, together with President Vladimir Putin, working to get the
deadlock between our countries that has seen no movement for more
than 70 years back into motion again. President Putin and I met at the
beginning of this month in Vladivostok. This was our 22nd summit
meeting. I will meet him again in the near future.
We must resolve the territorial issue that lies between Japan and
Russia and conclude a peace treaty between our two countries. Once a
Japan-Russia peace treaty comes into existence, the peace and
prosperity of East Asia will attain a more certain cornerstone.
Ladies and gentlemen, from this very location at this time last year, I
strongly urged North Korea to resolve its abductions, nuclear, and
missile issues. As someone who appealed for the full implementation of
all relevant UN Security Council resolutions, I pay the greatest interest
in changes of North Korea.
North Korea is now at a crossroads at which it will either seize, or fail
to seize, the historic opportunity it was afforded. North Korea has both
4/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
untapped natural resources and a labor force whose productivity can
be greatly enhanced.
Japan’s policy of seeking to settle the unfortunate past and normalize
its relations with North Korea once the abductions, nuclear, and
missile issues are resolved will not change. We will be unstinting in our
assistance to unleash the potential North Korea holds.
However, I must reiterate one thing time and time again. We will bring
about the return of all Japanese abductees. I am determined to make
this a reality.
In order to resolve the abductions issue, I am also ready to break the
shell of mutual distrust with North Korea, get off to a new start, and
meet face to face with Chairman Kim Jong-Un. At present, nothing has
been decided regarding a Japan-North Korea summit meeting, but if
we are going to hold one, then I am determined it must be a meeting
that contributes to the resolution of the abductions issue.
I wish to comment briefly on Japan-China relations as well. The
mutual visits at the leaders’ level that began this year will continue,
with me visiting China next month, to be followed by my inviting
President Xi Jinping to Japan, thereby adding to our bilateral relations
and to the entire region another definitive axle for stability.

Promoting the “Free and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy”

When the confrontational structure is cleared out of Northeast Asia,
the maritime corridor running from the Arctic Ocean to the Sea of
5/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Japan, through the Pacific Ocean to the Indian Ocean will become
increasingly important.
Japan, located directly above it and also possessing a vast exclusive
economic zone, or “EEZ,” hopes for stability and peace in these waters
as well as in the airspaces above them.
The countries of ASEAN lie at the “confluence of the two seas” -- the
Pacific and Indian Oceans. And it was the forerunners living in what
we now call the Pacific island countries who in eras long past crossed
these two oceans to introduce products to faraway eastern Africa.
What I call the “Free and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy” derives from our
desire to preserve the blessings of open seas, together with these very
countries, as well as the United States, Australia, India, and others, and
indeed, all countries and peoples who share the same intent.
What must control our sea and air spaces that are broad and wide is
the rule of law, and the rules-based order, which are in turn backed by
solid institutions. Hence my strategy.
The other day, foreign students in Japan proudly returned to their
home countries of Malaysia, the Philippines, and Sri Lanka with new
academic degrees in hand. These degrees were master’s degrees that
can only be obtained in Japan.
They are master’s degrees in maritime safety and security policy. In
addition to the students the Japan Coast Guard sends to the program
were senior officials from various coast guard authorities in countries
all around Asia. The students who graduated the other day were in the
third cohort of students to enter the program.
6/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Maritime order is not a matter of power, but a matter of the rule of law
and one that is rules-based. Every year a class learning such an
everlasting truth and taking it as a guiding principle for their lives will
head out from Japan to the seas. This is very promising indeed.
Cultivating those who will protect and defend a free and open IndoPacific is, precisely, Japan’s noble mission.

Inviting teachers from Gaza

Ladies and gentlemen, as I was preparing this address, I created a new
but modest program.
At the beginning of 2019, we will invite to Japan approximately ten
elementary and junior high school teachers from the Gaza Strip. This
will be the first such group and we will continue to invite teachers
annually.
Teachers who find themselves in Japan, a place so different for them
both culturally and historically, will naturally put the situation in Gaza
and the Middle East into a wider perspective, enabling them to see
their own hometowns and region anew. Such an experience should
somehow work in a unique way as a solace to them.
It goes without saying that for peace, efforts must be made on both
sides. But hopefully this program of ours will impart a means of hope
to the teachers from Gaza and the children in their care.
Once 20 years pass, there will be 200 teachers who will have
experienced visiting Japan. The number of students taught by them
will number in the thousands. I look forward to that day.
7/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Japan and the Japanese looking intently at the future

The goal of Japanese diplomacy, which I conveyed to you to some
extent today, is to make the future of the world and the region
something that is certain.
In addition, what I wish is for the young people who will live in the
Japan of the future to vigorously take on challenges. The duty of our
generation is to create an environment that facilitates this.
It is as if a new breeze is now about to blow in Japan.
From the end of April next year into the beginning of May, His Majesty
the Emperor will abdicate and His Imperial Highness the Crown
Prince will accede to the imperial throne. In fact this is the first
imperial succession in 200 years to accompany the abdication of the
current Emperor. In October we will welcome guests of honor from
around the world who will come to extend their good wishes.
Next June, Japan will host the G20 summit. As the chair of the
meeting, I intend to lead the discussions about issues facing the
international community, including the state of the global economy
and environmental issues.
Soon after, in August, Japan will host the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development, or “TICAD.” This will be the
seventh time to hold this summit, which Japan has continued to hold
with great care since 1993 and which has earned unwavering trust
from national leaders all across Africa. For example we will discuss
8/9

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
with each other “universal health coverage,” whose importance I have
highlighted a number of times.
And lest we forget, next year Japan hosts the Rugby World Cup, and in
2020, Tokyo hosts the Olympic and Paralympic Games. Our eyes will
continue to be fixed on the future.
When Japan and the Japanese people fix their gaze squarely on the
future, Japan increases in vitality. Japanese looking intently at the
future will become people who determinedly take on responsibility for
achieving the SDGs. Such next-generation Japanese youth will work
commendably as flag bearers for the “UN spirit.” I am absolutely
certain of that.
In closing, I will state that in light of the lack of progress in reforming
the Security Council, the significance of the United Nations in the 21st
century world is already being starkly questioned.
But that is precisely why Japan will never let up in its contributions to
the United Nations. I will end my address with a pledge that Japan,
together with Secretary-General Guterres, will push forward with the
reform of the Security Council and the reform of the United Nations.
Thank you very much.

9/9

