Check against delivery
Statement by H.E. Mr. Kairat Abdrakhmanov,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan
the High-Level General Debate of the 73rd session of the UNGA
“Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global leadership and
shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies”
New York, 28 September 2018
Madam/Mr. President,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
As we commemorate this year, the 100th anniversary of the birth of one
of the greatest sons of humanity – Nelson Mandela – I would like to begin my
statement with his quote: “It is easy to break down and destroy. The heroes
are those who make peace and build.”
Madam/Mr. President,
We have approached the 73rd session of the General Assembly with a
grown number of problems vis-à-vis last year, facing a lack of trust and mutual
respect. We find ourselves in a state of a profound world-wide crisis that
touches every aspect of the life of each and every person in our
interconnected and rapidly accelerating world.
Millions of people live under a shadow of dreadful wars, such as in
Syria, Yemen and many other corners of the Globe. Kazakhstan believes that
war can never be a lasting solution to any problem.
Based on this conviction and sharing the belief that the only viable
solution to the current crisis in Syria is the inclusive and Syrian-led political
process, we launched the Astana process towards strengthening confidencebuilding measures between the conflicting parties in Syria.
Our far-reaching commitment is embodied in the 2016 anti-war
Manifesto “The World. 21st Century”, by Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan
Nazarbayev, who stated in that treatise: “The main tool for resolving all
disputes between states should be a peaceful dialogue and constructive
negotiations on the basis of equal responsibility for peace and security, mutual
respect and non-interference into domestic affairs.”
It is a roadmap for peace, calling for the efficient use of all tools
available – from early warning, conflict prevention, diplomacy and mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, to sustainable development.

!2
Ladies and gentlemen,
My country has become a net contributor to peace, security and stability,
economic and social development - not only in our region, but far beyond.
We have carefully preserved peace and harmony in our multi-ethnic and
multi-religious society, stressing and enforcing the equality and dignity of
every citizen.
We have achieved this while also creating an efficient economic model
– our economy has grown more than 20 times from the day my country
emerged as an independent state.
Looking forward, Kazakhstan has a clear vision for its future
development. By 2050 we seek to become one of the top thirty most
advanced economies in the world, meeting the highest global standards in
terms of economic performance and transparent governance, especially those
of the OECD.
As a new model of economic growth, President Nazarbayev in his
annual address earlier this year announced the New Opportunities under
the Fourth Industrial Revolution. It outlines the path for our country to
achieve those ambitious goals. This new road map focuses on
industrialisation, further development of our resource potential, the use of
smart technologies as a chance for a breakthrough in the development of the
agricultural industry, increasing the efficiency of transport and logistics
infrastructure, “reloading” the financial sector and the strengthening of human
capital as the basis of modernisation.
On a global level President Nazarbayev has put forward the G-Global
initiative – a communication and IT platform to ensure wide and inclusive
dialogue on finding common solution for global economic and financial
shortcomings. The platform unites prominent international scientists,
entrepreneurs, politicians.
Madam/Mr. President,
In the regional context we are committed to further extending our
partnership among Central Asian countries and to enhancing our common
capability to withstand threats and challenges.
Today in Central Asia, a "new reality" has been formed. We consider the
political, economic and cultural potential of the region as a common resource,
the most rational and effective use of which is achievable only in a collective
format.
Our shared goal is creating in our region of Central Asia and beyond a
model for a zone of peace, security, trust, development and cooperation.
Several features of such a zone are already in place, as exemplified by
the Council of the Turkic Speaking States, the International Aral Sea Fund and

!3
its last Summit, that demonstrated strong political collaboration amongst
regional leaders, the Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in Central Asia and other
mechanisms.
Being the first country from the region represented in the UN Security
Council, we try to deeper focus to the situation in Afghanistan with its full
implications and threats in the broader regional context.
Besides, Kazakhstan for many years has been contributing significantly
to peace and rehabilitation of this country. We believe that the revival of the
country as a prosperous and peaceful neighbour will have a positive impact
on overall security in our region. A special role in this process should be
played by Afghan women.
To increase international awareness and support for the needs of
Afghan women and girls, we hosted the Regional Conference on Empowering
Women in Afghanistan on September 5, 2018 in Astana. It was attended by
female politicians, parliamentarians, entrepreneurs and civil sector members
from Afghanistan and Central Asian nations. The event gave great impetus to
strengthening the role of women not only in Afghanistan, but in the whole
Central Asian region – helping to improve their lives and to influence their
future.
New globalization trends imply cross-border threats and challenges,
requiring a new paradigm of addressing them. These transnational challenges
are specific but common to particular regions, especially conflict-prone ones,
and necessitate transit from “country-specific” to “regional” strategy to tackle
them. Regional strategy becomes effective with “whole-of-system”
coordination of UN structures’ activities region-wide.
As a pilot case we offer the establishment of a UN regional Hub for
SDGs in Almaty. The city already hosts over a dozen of UN offices with
regional, sub-regional and multi-country mandates. This sound UN field
presence successfully promotes SDGs in our region for years. And I am
happy to announce that as a host country, we will provide these offices with a
state-of-the-art, fully equipped and furnished building, specifically designed as
per UN requirements by the end of this year.
Dear colleagues,
As an example of regional cooperation, I would also like to outline the
results of the Caspian Summit held a month ago in the city of Aktau in
Western Kazakhstan. We all are extremely satisfied and proud that the longawaited legal status of the Caspian Sea has been agreed and determined by
the five littoral countries. The treaty creates a solid legal basis for further
comprehensive interaction between all the Caspian states, strengthening
regional security and stability, as well as the efficient use of the sea resources.

!4
I would like to emphasize that the Caspian Sea has become an area of peace,
harmony, good neighbourliness and enhanced international cooperation.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Today, the ability to show global leadership and responsibility is
challenged by the numerous threats – from spread of weapons – conventional
and of mass destruction, as well as terrorism, extremism, organized crime,
and all forms of trafficking, to food, water, energy and health insecurities.
From violation of the human rights, particularly rights of women, youth and
children, degrading human dignity to lack of respect and justice for all.
Kazakhstan tries its best to stay on the vanguard of tackling these
international challenges, as well as seeking innovative solutions for them.
We fully support the efforts of the Secretary-General to implement
his reforms for peace and security architecture, the UN development system
and management. We will contribute towards improving shared responsibility,
transparency and overall coordination of all UN organs to achieve these
goals.
We are engaged in reforming the methods of work of the Security
Council so as to enhance its relevance, transparency, accountability and
effective capacity to respond speedily to varying crises.
Madam/Mr. President,
Kazakhstan stays committed to strengthening peacekeeping with clear
and achievable mandates, highly qualified personnel and adequate resources.
We will increase our contribution to UN peacekeeping operations
through innovative forms of partnerships including co-deployment. We will
deploy a unit and additional officers to UN peacekeeping missions, during
this 73rdsession, and expand their number in the future.
Being fully supportive to the concept of preventive diplomacy, conflict
prevention and confidence-building President of Kazakhstan initiated creating
the UN Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, as
well as the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures
in Asia, which comprises 27 countries, spanning from the Middle to Far East
and South-East Asia.
My country has proven itself to be a moral leader in nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation, having renounced the world's fourth
largest nuclear arsenal and the world's largest nuclear test site in
Semipalatinsk.
We call upon all other countries to follow our example as nuclear
weapons do not ensure either real power or true protection. Protection is
provided through the trust of the international community.

!5
Kazakhstan signed the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons on 2 March 2018, following its engaged participation in the
elaboration and adoption of the Treaty. Now we are processing its ratification.
The early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty remains a key goal for us. Our country, one of the most impacted by
the harmful consequences of nuclear tests, is making great efforts to reach
Global Zero.
We therefore sponsored General Assembly resolution 64/35 that
established the International Day against Nuclear Tests. Three weeks ago,
Member States commemorated the ninth observance of the Day, with the
UN General Assembly firmly supporting the urgent and complete end to all
nuclear testing.
The creation of nuclear weapon free zones remains one of the most
effective measures in combating the spread of WMD.
With this in mind, President Nursultan Nazarbayev proposed
strengthening the cooperation between nuclear weapons free zones and
convening inter-zone conferences on a regular basis. Astana proposes
hosting the first such meeting.
We are also steadfastly advocating for the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula and call on all the parties involved to agree on mutually
acceptable conditions to keep the negotiation process on.
We also support preserving and ensuring the proper implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) for Iran and the
thorough investigation of chemical crimes in Syria, and also preventing
chemical terrorism.
Dear colleagues,
Countering terrorism is of special significance for my country.
Kazakhstan has ratified 16 of the 19 UN instruments on combating
terrorism, with measures taken for the early accession to the remaining three
treaties.
Stronger global leadership in fighting terrorism remains crucial. We must
do more to address the roots of radicalization using best practices and
relevant UN instruments.
We are actively working under the Joint Plan of Action for
Implementing the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (GCTS) in
Central Asia. Having contributed 300,000 US dollars, Kazakhstan has
become the first donor of its Third Phase, and we thank other donors too.
Addressing the General Assembly in 2015, President Nazarbayev put
forward several counter-terrorism initiatives: the creation of a Global
Counter-Terrorism Coalition/Network and the adoption of a comprehensive
UN document on combating terrorism. In this context, our country is offering

!6
the Code of Conduct towards Achieving a World Free of Terrorism,
inviting all countries to closely coordinate in the fight against this evil. We
commend all our partners for their support.
The Code singing ceremony was just held earlier this afternoon at a
High-Level Special Event with seventy Member States having joined the
document, to whom we are very grateful. The Code remains open for signing
by other states and we invite you all to manifest your good will in fighting this
disastrous phenomenon.
Madam/Mr. President,
Our strong conviction is that comprehensive success in the area of
“hard security” is impossible without success in achieving the sustainable
development goals.
We have launched a number of initiatives to implement the SDGs: the
renowned international EXPO 2017 exhibition on the theme of Future Energy;
the Post-EXPO International Centre for Green Technologies and Investment
Projects; the annual Astana Economic Forum; the KazAID development
agency, the Regional Hub for Excellence in Civil Service; the Regional Centre
for Disaster Risk Reduction, and the antinarcotic Central Asian Regional
Information Coordination Centre. All of these have many promising prospects
for the future.
Kazakhstan is the world’s largest landlocked country. It also is a
part of the biggest landlocked region of Central Asia and Afghanistan,
and the farthest away from any ocean. It has made many strides in achieving
connectivity and turning what can be termed as “landlockedness” into
“landlinkedness”.
Based on the outcomes of the implementation of Almaty Programme of
Action and working jointly on the fulfilling of the Vienna Programme of Action
for LLDCs we strive to further expand communications, enhance
infrastructure, boost trade and transit, counter climate change, and improve
energy efficiency.
That was why Kazakhstan along with the UN Office of High
Representative for LLDCs, LDCs and SIDS hosted 16-17 May 2018 in Astana
the LLDCs Ministerial Meeting on improving transport connectivity and trade
facilitation. The Conference increased the visibility for the needs of LLDCs on
international stage and contributed to mobilizing global support to improve
lives of millions of people in geographically disadvantaged countries.
We are ready to share our experiences in promoting the goals of our
large scale “Third Modernization” programme, geared towards joining the
top 30 most developed nations, through innovative development, bold
institutional reforms, sound investments and extensive international
cooperation and knowledge-sharing.

!7
In this context, South-South cooperation is gaining importance for us.
Together with the UN system, and other partners, we will continue to extend
assistance to African countries, focusing on resolving conflicts,
strengthening political stability and security, and promoting sustainable peace
and development. With UNDP, our first successful experience was a $2
million project, entitled “Africa – Kazakhstan Partnership for the SDGs”, as
well as biogas projects for SIDS with UN ESCAP.
The recent establishment of the Islamic Organization for Food
Security in Astana will contribute to humanitarian assistance effort through
the creation of food reserves. Also, a new initiative of OIC cooperation in the
area of science and technologies will serve the purpose of narrowing the
digital and IT gap between the developed and developing countries.
Madam/Mr. President,
Kazakhstan’s hallmarks, among many others, are pluralism, and
interfaith accord. They are promoted through an unprecedented dialogue
platform, the Triennial Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions in Astana.
Its “added value” is it brings together religious and political leaders,
international organizations, civil society and turns the paradigm of conflict and
clash of cultures and religions into a unique model of tolerance and harmony.
President Nazarbayev has unveiled a new programme of spiritual
modernization of the Kazakh society “Rukhani Zhangyru (Spiritual
Enlightenment)”, blending tradition with contemporary elements. I can convey
the essence of the initiative in his words: “Dreaming of our great future, we
should not forget about our worthy past” (Мечтая о нашем великом
будущем, не следует забывать и о нашем достойном прошлом).
Madam/Mr. President,
Before I conclude, I reiterate that it is only through our collective will and
solidarity we can turn this world in crisis into a world of hope and promise.
The United Nations should stay open and relevant to all people, since it
is our common responsibility to leave a strengthened and well used heritage
to move towards peaceful, equitable and sustainable society where no one is
left behind.
In conclusion I want to again refer to the words of Nelson Mandela – “It
is in your hands to create a better world for all who live in it”.
We do need to turn our good will and good words into good action. As
President of Kazakhstan H.E. Nursultan Nazarbayev clearly stated: “The time
to look ahead is now. The time for action is now. The time to show our will is
now. The time to make a difference is now” (Пришло время смотреть

!8
вперед. Пришло время браться за дело. Пришло время проявить волю.
Пришло время изменить саму жизнь).
I thank you!

