Permanent Mission of the Republic o Keny to the United Nations
866 U.N. Plaza, Rm 304, New York, NY 10017

STATEMENT

BY
H.E MR. UHURU KENYATTA

PRESIDENT AND COMMANDER IN-CHIEF
OF THE DEFENCE FORCES OF THE REPUBLIC OF KENYA
DURING
THE
GENERAL DEBATE

OF THE
73rd SESSION
OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

SEPTEMBER 26, 2018
UNITED NATIONS, NEW YORK

Please check against delivery

Tel: (212) 421-4740/1, Fax: (212) 486-1985 Email: kenya@un.int

1. I warmly congratulate you Madam President, on your election to

preside over the 73rd Session of the General Assembly. I have no
doubt that the experience from your distinguished career in the
service of the Republic of Ecuador will be invaluable to your new
responsibility.
2. I also note with appreciation that your strategic priorities for the
73rd session namely, strengthening multilateralism, catalysing the
wellbeing of all persons and a sustainable planet, as well as
building a stronger, more efficient multilateral system, converges
with Kenya s aspirations. It is my pleasure, then, to reaffirm my
Government s complete commitment to our shared vision and
support to you during your tenure.

3. The 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly is the
second one to be held during the tenure of Secretary-General

Guterres who has already spoken publicly about the financial
situation of the UN and has even spelt out reforms that need to be
executed to ensure optimal utilization of our finances.
4. I applaud the Secretary-General for his efforts and courage to cut
costs and for his commitment to ensure the UN's resources are
better managed. Indeed, I am convinced part of these objectives

will be achieved with the adoption of the proposals made in regard
to the adoption of the Global Service Delivery Model. In this regard,
it is my hope that Kenya will have the privilege to host one of the
proposed three such centres.

5. I also applaud the commitment of the UN staff who are engaged
daily in tackling a myriad of challenges that are greater than any
one country or region can solve on its own.

6. Kenya strongly supports the General Assembly's embrace of better
alignment in the mandates of urbanization, human settlement, and
environmental governance. This will enable the UN Human
Settlements Programme and the UN Environmental Programme to

fully deliver on their role as global focal points on human
settlements and the environment matters across the UN system.

1

7. Madam President, even as we speak of important reforms at the
United Nations, we must recognize that the need for reforms is
much broader and of great significance.
8. In almost every part of the world, a growing lack of trust is

opening a dangerous gap between citizens and their governing
institutions. This is partly a result of the impact of a number of
significant factors. Key among them is the growing demand by the
citizenry for accountability, occasioned by an attendant awareness

of the gap between available resources and the provision of
services to the populations. These demands are also fueled by a
growing awareness of the scourge of corruption and wastage of

public resources, and their negative effects on the lives and hopes
of people.
9. Never before in human history, due to the benefits of accessible
information, have so many people known how public trust is

undermined by the acts of commission or omission by a few
individuals and networks, both in the private and public sector.
Weak systems of governance are manipulated and exploited for

the gain of predatory interests at the expense of the common
man. The free press and social media are rife with news of

outright fraud, cynical conflicts of interest, and financial
arrangements that privatize gains during prosperous times then
socialize losses during economic catastrophe.

10. Added to individual corruption, major corporations are
misrepresenting their earnings to deny governments revenues

needed for investment in public goods. The extraction of mineral
and other resources continues to be subject to corrupt dealings

that not only deny communities and countries any benefit but that
almost routinely lead to violence and instability. These dealings,
have over several decades been clothed with the garments of
legality, institutionalizing the exploitation by cartels and oligopolies
that are pillaging Africa and other underdeveloped regions of all
their natural wealth. Hence, the popular theorizing of Africa s
resource curse.

11. It has become clearer to citizens all over the world that what is
enabling the illegal and illicit conduct of corrupt individuals and

2

!

companies is a globalized financial and legal system. Its impact is
worldwide but is probably leads to the most suffering in Africa.
¦

12. There is increasing evidence that Africa is a net exporter of much-

needed capital to the world through illicit outflows. Conservative
estimates indicate that between 1980 and 2009, illicit money
outflows from Africa ranged between 1.2 to 1.4 trillion dollars,

roughly equal to Africa s current GDP and surpassing by far the
money it received from outside over the same period.
13. Every illicit dollar that leaves Africa goes somewhere. Most often to
where the rest of the money from tax evaders and criminals is

hidden. Africans suffer as a result, but the irony is that what is
done to Africa, eventually is done to the rest of the world.

1 . The present system of transferring and laundering illicit capital is
enabling corrupt networks all over the world to illegally acquire in
one country, while being welcomed with open arms as investors in
another country. The same system is used by drug cartels and
even terrorist organizations. Collectively, drug addiction, violent
extremism, international crime and terrorist actions result visit
misery and hurt to millions of victims all over the world.
!

15. Madam President, the most dramatic manifestation of the

destructive impact of the result misery of the effect of the crimes
above is the loss of trust in governing institutions at the national,
regional and global level. As people observe the impunity of the
corrupt, they increasingly feel that the economic systems are

rigged against their hopes. The trust deficit grows.
16. Often times, institutions of government have become vehicles to

capture for ethnic or racial interests articulated by populists and
extremists who thrive in chronic instability and drive it forward
with their incitement. When networks and cartels in government
capture the state for their own selfish gain, and represent
themselves as champions of an ethnic or religious group, the
result is all too often civil strife and civil war. In such an

atmosphere, the result of a political competition can begin to seem
like an existential threat to groups and their members.

3

Ladies and Gentlemen,
17. The fragility of our world is also manifest in instability and
conflicts, as in the case of both Somalia and South Sudan.
18. In Somalia, AMISOM is a unique regional effort that has deeply
degraded one of al Qaeda s most ambitious affiliates. Kenya has
been part of this journey from the start. It was in Nairobi where a
transitional federal state was negotiated into existence, with the
material and moral support of the Kenyan people. We have never
wavered. Kenyans have lost lives and property in pursuit of peace

and stability in Somalia, and we appreciate our regional and
international colleagues and partners. In Somalia, a historic

chapter on Africa's will to peace and security is being written. We
appreciate the partners standing with the region.
19. The job is not yet done. We must ensure military success over al

Shabaab if other political and economic solutions are to take firm
root. So far, the troop contributing continue to bear a

disproportionate burden. We have consistently sought for
international support that is commensurate with the threat
scenario, including in the form of enablers and force multipliers.
These have not been forthcoming. What the international

community is doing with Somalia is not good enough. We
understand that these are difficult times economically, but global
terrorism must be faced boldly if we have learnt any real lessons in
the last 20 years. AMISOM needs support, let us make it happen.
20. In building peace there are no silver bullets, the process of bring
stability and peace to South Sudan requires commitment to walk
closely with the South Sudanese parties particularly now after the
signing of the revitalized peace agreement. Kenya is proud for
having walked with Sudan and South Sudan in their pursuit of
peace and stability. We have always known and firmly believe that
the constancy of our effort would yield the fruit of a prosperous
and free South Sudan.

21. We are calling on all of you to join us in this endeavor for peace
and stability in South Sudan, I appeal to you, neighbours, donors,
international agencies and friends of South Sudan all to redouble
your efforts and support this cause end the suffering of the
children, women and men of South Sudan.

4

Ladies and Gentlemen,
22. Allow me to turn to the global sphere which has also not been
spared of the challenges of today. Multilateralism is under severe
strain - as evidenced by our global trading and economic
management system. Rarely has the system of trade and security

that was established following the Second World War, under the
aegis of the United Nations, been under greater strain. The

populism and extremism unleashed at the national level has
brought forward powerful constituencies that want a dismantling
of the global order.
23. I believe that the most urgent political task in the world today is to
close the trust gap between people and governing institutions.
Governments are not owed trust by citizens; that trust must be
won and protected. It is not an exaggeration to say that on this

issue revolves the future of global stability and the continuity of
many states.

24. Your Excellencies, Madam President, there are bold solutions
that we must embrace to succeed.

25. We have to fight impunity and corruption. Seriously and without
fear or favour. In Kenya, we are undertaking an aggressive
campaign against fraud and abuse of public trust. We have

reached out to our partners in Switzerland and the United
Kingdom to take action against transfers of illegal proceeds of
corruption to their banking and financial systems. We will pursue
more such bilateral agreements.
26. They must be accompanied by determined reforms, that are

subject to clear timelines and standards, in the multilateral system
that combat systemic corruption, money laundering and the
offshoring of illicit outflows. The single overarching aim must be to
make it exceedingly difficult to transfer and launder illegally
acquired wealth in any part of the world.
27. All UN bodies should be tasked with detecting corruption in their
different focus areas and promoting the skills and systems to
combat it. In the understanding that honest, transparent and
responsive government is fundamental to the achievement of their
aims.

5

28. We must create a stronger understanding of the presence and
impact of corruption in their different focus areas.

29. The gap in trust at the global level is aimed squarely at the
leadership and processes of the multilateral system as reflected
in the UN Security Council, the Bretton Woods institutions and
other parts of the system. In the years following the Second World
War, the present status quo was functional and understandable.
No more almost 75 years later. The global governance system
must reform if it is to be relevant and effective.

30. The clearest sign that change is real will be in reforms to the
membership of the UN Security Council. Kenya joins in the
demand for two permanent seats for Africa with all the rights
and prerogatives of current members, including the right of veto,
and additional non-permanent seats. As we all know, Africa is
under represented in the non-permanent category of the Security
Council and not represented at all in the permanent category.

This historical injustice is a clear indication of the skewed system
that has perpetuated an exclusive model of governance that fuels
the trust gap between nations. The governance, leadership and
employment in UN funds, programmes and agencies must also

become more noticeably inclusive of the global south and Africa.
31. Kenya is a proud host to the only UN global headquarters in the
global South that includes the UNEP and UN HABITAT. We are
strongly committed to supporting their mandates and
effectiveness. And we believe, strongly, that the multilateralism
that would headquarter major organizations in Africa and the
Global South is what the world needs. Global decision-making
needs more of Africa, if the world is to respond wisely to the
demographic and economic shifts underway.
32. Your E cellencies, without Governments and the international

system addressing the broadening deficits in fairness, inclusivity,
and anti-corruption, populism, radicalization, civil strife and

political instability will continue to destabilize and destroy.
33. Today s problems, risks and threats are complex and call for more
not less cooperation, more not less observance of the rule of law,
more not less negotiations, we need a rule based multilateral
system.

6

34. We are in a decisive moment, and Kenya will play its part to be a
champion for change, and I welcome all of you in a campaign for
our collective benefit.

Ladies and Gentlemen,
35. To conclude, the sea is increasing being seen as a sustainable

source of food, jobs and prosperity to the growing populations of
the world. It is with this in mind that Kenya and Canada will be co¬
hosting the first ever Global Conference on Sustainable Blue
Economy in November this year, in Nairobi. I welcome you to this
conference and its deliberations on how we can access and

harness financing, technology and skills to innovations as well as
capacity building, to allow us to turn the blue economy into a
driver of millions of jobs, source of food and sustainable, shared
prosperity. We will be greatly honoured to host you in Nairobi.
Thank you.

And God bless you all!

7

