•->r

r'ff

(Di'wan of
fffie frime (Minister
State oj Kuwoit

f'MyrMW

1 d«

PI FARF CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

STATEMENT OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT

DELIVERED BY

THE REPRESENTATIVE OF HIS HIGHNESS THE AMIR
OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT

HIS HEIGHNESS SHEIKH JABER AL MUBARAK AL HAMAD AL SABAH
PRIME MINISTER OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT
BEFORE

THE SEVENTY-THIRD SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY
GENERAL DEBATE

UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS - NEW YORK

WEDNEESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2018

'Diwan of
'fde frme Umister
State of Kuwait

^

^

Madam President,

Your Highnesses & Excellencies,
Mr. Secretary-Generai,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

THE PEACE, MERCY AND BLESSINGS OF ALLAH
BE UPON YOU

On behalf of the Government and the people of the State of Kuwait, It
pleases me at the outset, to extend our sincere congratulations to you
personally, and your friendly country, the Republic of Ecuador, on your
election as President of the 73"^^ Session of the United Nations General

Assembly. I would also like to assure you of our full support, in all what would
facilitate your work and the fulfillment of your responsibilities. We are fully
confident of your ability to assume this role, and are certain that your
experience in International Issues will contribute positively to the conduct of
the work of this session. I would also like to avail myself of this opportunity to

express my country's sincere appreciation for the outstanding efforts exerted
by your predecessor. His Excellency Mr. MIroslav Lajcak, during his capable
and successful presidency of the previous session.

In this respect, I would be remiss If I do not pay tribute to the great
efforts of His Excellency, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr.
Antonio Guterres, in leading this organization, according to a vision and ideas
derived from the principles and alms of the United Nations Charter, centered
around the maintenance of International peace and security, while
emphasizing our support of his reformative Initiatives, particularly those that
relate to the peaceful settlement of conflicts, which have promoted the
approach of preventatlve diplomacy and moved It from its academic
frameworks and limited experimental phases to the plane of systematic
application, In accordance with an international plan seeking to harmonize
effective reforms that would advance the role that we expect from the United
Nations.

Diwan of
j'de frime Umstcr

State of'Kuwait

^

^

Madam President,

Preventing and resolving conflicts by peaceful means, has been and
continues to be one of the most important reasons for the establishment of the
United Nations. After the bioody experiences of the First and Second World
Wars, and despite their unprecedented catastrophic consequences on
humanity, those wars were the original motivation to develop a meaningful
international system, to protect our present and future generations from the
scourge of war. The past seven decades have witnessed historical and
concrete roles for the United Nations, during which it has developed its
working methods and expanded its mandates, to including humanitarian,
political, security, developmental, and economic issues in various parts of the
world. However, the increased frequency of challenges and the exacerbation
of the severity of conflicts, and the risks they pose for international peace and
security, have exposed the urgent need to bolster the ability of the United
Nations, to provide the required response to the challenges our world faces
today, such as the spread of the phenomenon of violence, extremism, and
terrorism, as well as the dangers of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, in addition to the continuous violations of human rights and the
phenomenon of climate change, and other challenges. Here, the proposals and
plans that the Secretary-General has introduced to restructure the Secretariat
with a view to enhance its effectiveness and increase its efficiency, to ensure
that its efforts in ending conflicts are not squandered, come as a preliminary

important step to transform the problem of reform, from a hypothesis of
discussion to a realistic application. Here, we renew our support for this step,
which concretizes part of the aspirations of the peoples of the world towards
this Organization, as a safe haven and the guarantor of a world of peace and
stability.

Madam President,

After nine months of non-permanent membership on the Security
Council, for the period 2018-2019, the State of Kuwait has become increasingly
aware of the importance of reforming the Security Council to make it more
capable of shouldering its responsibilities to face up to the growing challenges
of today's world, reflecting the international reality in which we live today, in a
manner that would strengthen its credibility and legitimacy, as well as having a

Diwan of

Mm

'fUe frime Umster
State of'Kuwait

permanent Arab representation commensurate with the number of Arab
Member States, and the size of their contributions to the various activities of
the United Nations.

Since the first day of its non-permanent membership on the Councii, the
State of Kuwait was keen on adhering to an objective approach in dealing with
the various issues and fiies iisted on the Council's agenda. Such an approach
comes as a realistic refiection of its foreign policy, based on the respect of the

sovereignty and independence of States, and the non-interference in their
internal affairs. Additionally we believe in the lofty message of the United
Nations Organization seeking to maintain international peace and security.
Although the Security Council agenda is replete with Middle Eastern issues,
nonetheless Kuwait's involvement with this agenda was not constrained by
any cultural, ethnic, political, or geographical considerations

Through our non-permanent membership on the Councii, we have
sought to go beyond the routine of participation in the work of the Council.
Therefore we have aimed to broader horizons, with the objective of elevating
the rule of international law, with ail of its branches, including respect for

human rights, building a better future for the world's population, and totally
avoiding selectivity and bias in dealing with the various issues.
This trend, based on the Charter of the United Nations & the diplomatic

legacy of the State of Kuwait, gives preference to the peaceful solutions and
mediation efforts between the parties. This reflects the manner in which we
deal with the difficult issues and crises ravaging our world today. The human

being and his inherent rights continue to be the pillars of our foreign policy, as
based on the directions of His Highness, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Ai-Jaber AiSabah, the Amir of the State of Kuwait, who was honored by this esteemed
organization as a leader of humanitarian work.

Madam President,

The Palestinian question is one of the most important and oldest issues

iisted on the agenda of the Security Council. This year marks the 70*^
anniversary of the issuance of resolution 56 in August 1948, being the first
time the Councii dealt with this protracted question. Although successive
resolutions were issued by the United Nations Security Council and General
Assembly, in addition to the multiple international and regional initiatives

Diwan of
'fde frm UmsUr
State of'Kuwait

seeking to lay the foundations of peace in the Middle East, Israel persists in its
intransigence, rejecting and Ignoring the resolutions of international
legitimacy, and continues its expansionist policies through the establishment
of illegal settlements on occupied Palestinian territories. This constitutes a
gross defiance and blatant rejection to implement resolutions of international
legitimacy, the latest of which was resolution 2334 (2016) which demanded the
cessation of all Israeli illegal settlement practices. Furthermore, Israel
continues desecrating the sanctity of the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem.
This is in addition to its abusive violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, by detaining thousands of Palestinians in its prisons and
detention centers, and its repeated military aggressions in the Gaza strip,
during which it did not observe the basic principles for the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, including during foreign occupation, and did not
adhere to the agreed upon international measures set forth in the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 concerning the protection of civilians in time of
war.

Out of keenness of the State of Kuwait on the full enforcement of

Security Council resolutions, we presented a draft resolution to the Security
Council last May, which demanded from Israel, the occupying power, to
immediately cease the use of illegitimate force against civilians, and called for
international protection to ensure the safety and security of the Palestinian
civiiian population in the occupied territories.
Despite the non-adoption of the draft resolution, the State of Kuwait
shall not spare any effort in support of the legitimate political rights of the
Palestinian people. This shall continue until the end of the occupation and the
attainment of a permanent, just, and comprehensive peace, in accordance with
the initiative calling for land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, and the
implementation of all resolutions relating to international legitimacy, calling for
the two state solution, and the establishment of a Palestinian State within the

borders of the 4^*^ of June of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Madam President,

The Syrian crisis has entered its 8^*^ year, due to the inability of the
international community to find a solution, ending its devastating
consequences and horrific losses. Throughout, the Syrian citizen has been the
main victim in a conflict which resulted in more than 400,000 people dead. This

'Dimn of

'mm

'fde frime (Minister

State of'Kuv/ait

^

^

is In addition to more than 12 million refugees and displaced persons. The
State of Kuwait, in cooperation & coordination with the friendly delegation of
the Kingdom of Sweden, has submitted resolution 2041, in regard to the
humanitarian situation in Syria. The Security Council's unanimous adoption of
this resolution reflects a positive signal of solidarity and unity with respect to
putting an end to human suffering, the cessation of hostile acts, and
guaranteeing access to humanitarian assistance for those in need within
Syrian territories in a timely fashion. Yet, today, we regret that the resolution
was not implemented nor adhered to on the ground.
These efforts take place in the context of the humanitarian role pursued
by the State of Kuwait, in dealing with the deteriorating human conditions in
Syria, since the start of this crisis. In the course of these efforts, the State of
Kuwait has hosted 3 international conferences for donors supporting the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Through these conferences, my country has
offered voluntary contributions amounting to 1 billion and six hundred million
dollars.

Now here, we renew our principled and unwavering position regarding
the Syrian crisis. This position rejects any military solution for this crisis,
stressing the importance of working to intensify efforts to bring all parties to a
direct dialogue, in an effort to reach a peaceful settlement according to
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254. The aim is to
achieve a political reality on which various components of the Syrian people
find consensus. This should preserve the unity and independence of Syria, in
order to achieve the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, which
guarantee bringing to Justice those who committed crimes.

Madam President,

The sisterly state of Yemen, is going through sensitive historic
challenges with serious implications on the political, humanitarian, and
economic planes. These are the consequences of the coup perpetrated against
the legitimate authority by the Houthi Group since September 2014. That group
has continued to reject the implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, as well as international initiatives aiming at achieving a political
settlement. That group has also continued its threats to the peace and stability
of the region through the launching of ballistic missiles on the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This has endangered the safety of free navigation

Di'wan of
'fde fritne Mimster
StateofXuwait

through the Strait of Bab-AI-Mandab and the Red Sea. In this regard, we stress
our severe condemnation for such activities, which contravene international
law and the international humanitarian law.

From this perspective, we renew our full commitment to respecting
Yemen's sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity. We also reject
any interference in Yemeni internal affairs, emphasizing our full support for the
constitutional legitimacy of Yemen. That is the country which was the cradle of
Arab civilization. We also stress the importance of prioritizing the political
solution of the crisis through resorting to the three agreed upon references.
These are the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council countries, and its
implementation mechanism, the outcomes of the Comprehensive National
Dialogue, and the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially resolution
2216.

in accordance with the method adhered to by Kuwaiti diplomacy,
inspired by its preventive character, which is based on mediation & political
settlement, my country, in the course of 2016, and for more than 100 days, has
hosted political consultations between the Yemeni parties, under the auspices
of the United Nations, it is in such framework that we renew our readiness to

host our Yemeni brethren for the signing of a final agreement whenever it is
achieved by the Yemeni parties. In this regard, we stress the continuation of
support for the United Nations efforts, and for those of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary General for Yemen, aiming at achieving a peaceful solution for
this crisis, guaranteeing the shortening of its duration.

Madam President,

The coup against the legitimacy of Yemen, had consequences which
played a major role in the deterioration of the humanitarian situation there.
Such results have caused frightening and unprecedented statistics, whereby
the Yemeni person continues to suffer and strive for securing his daily
sustenance. The State of Kuwait has not ignored the needs of the brotherly
Yemeni population. Therefore, Kuwait has contributed $350 million, the last
portion of which was $250 million, which were pledged at the Geneva
conference held last April. That amount has been delivered in full to UN
agencies and their mechanisms engaged in humanitarian activities.

'Dimn of

mmm

frm Uimster

State of'Kuwait

The purpose of all this aid has been the amelioration of the severity of
the dangerous deterioration of the humanitarian, health and economic
standards. But, such deterioration of standards will not be arrested without
striving for the restoration of peace and stability in Yemen, in order to protect
its sovereignty, territorial integrity, and the return of harmony to all population
sectors.

Madam President,

The spread of the phenomenon of terrorism and violent extremism in the
world, especially in the Middle East region, is to be regarded as an
unprecedented challenge, which has hit the world system to the core. This has
happened through the evolution of the ideology of the secretive and rogue
organization, which have used Islam as a cover for their destructive intentions.
The so called "Da'esh" "Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant", a terrorist group
which has perpetrated atrocities, including wide spread murder and
destruction in various areas of the Middle East, has compelled the emergence
of an international coalition to fight it. In this regard, the State of Kuwait has
contributed both material and moral support in accordance with the agreement
relating to combating terrorism adopted by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the United Nations through the years
from 1999-2001.

The brotherly Iraq has been the first to suffer from the crimes of that
terrorist group, yet the collaboration of the international community
represented by the Security Council with the Iraqi Government has played a
role of maximum effectiveness in cleansing the Iraqi territory from the
geographic positioning of that serious terror cancer.
Based on our conviction that the peace and security equation in the
post-war phase, cannot be achieved except through repairing the destructive
effects which are not in consonance with humanitarianism, my country has
hosted an international conference which dealt with rebuilding Iraq. At that
conference, the amount of pledges have exceeded $30 billion, of which the
State of Kuwait has contributed $2 billion.

Here we would like to renew our firm position regarding the offering of
various types of assistance to Iraq in order to enable it to complete the
fulfillment of its outstanding obligations provided for by relevant Security

Tlimn of
'fde frm 'Minister

State of'Kuwait

vi
''

^

Vi'^-'l
"" " "

) £.♦

Council resolutions, with the aim of aiding Iraq to regain Its role and position
regionally and internationally.
And in connection with the same regional planes, and guided by the
same principles that call for strengthening the rules of good neighborliness,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as set forth in the United
Nations Charter, we renew our call to the Islamic Republic of Iran to take

serious confidence building measures aimed to establish relations based on
cooperation, mutual respect, common interests, in a manner that would lead to
guiding the efforts and capabilities towards development and construction.
This would reflect the future aspiration of all peoples in the region for a life of
peace and security.

Madam President,

In accordance with what we have mentioned earlier, regarding the role
which my country has committed itself to pursue, and which is based on
according special priority to cases of humanitarian nature, and in response to
the tragic situation which the refugees of the Rohingya Muslim minority of
Myanmar are facing, the State of Kuwait has contributed to the organization of
a Security Council visit to both Bangladesh and Myanmar. Here, the aim was to
discuss the crisis of those refugees, to get acquainted with their situation and
to assess the steps which have been taken by the authorities of these two
countries towards this crisis. This is one of the gravest humanitarian crises
which have been witnessed by the world. We shall continue our efforts
through our membership on the Security Council, and in cooperation with all
parties concerned with guaranteeing a safe, voluntary, and dignified return of
these refugees and the bringing to account of those responsible for the crimes
committed against them.

Madam President,

The adoption of the agenda on the goals of the 2030 Sustainable
Development Plan is considered one of the most remarkable phases of
important success for the United Nations. That agenda is an extension of the
efforts of the international community which are based on the primary rules
emanating from the Millennium Development Goals. Such goals have achieved
their noble objective which stimulated the UN transitioning from the epoch of
8

(Dimn of
'ffie fme 'Umister
State ofKumt

defining relative goals in confronting the challenges to a new phase stamped
by its comprehensiveness and the search for root solutions. This has been a
picture whereby the human being has become its primary objective. It is a
phase where our fidelities to international obligations and solidarity on the
international level shall be the real leap for attaining the Sustainable

Development Goals with the aim of eradicating poverty with all of its
manifestations and ensuring that all human beings would attain their equal

rights to dignity, education, health, political participation, and the
empowerment of the young and of women.

This would also confront the effects of climate change in the context of

the historic Paris Agreement. This is because environmental degradation is to
be considered one of the main obstacles on the road to attaining these goals,

in line with the principle of shared responsibility, taking into account the
disparity of responsibilities and burdens of states.

Furthermore, among the most prominent challenges facing sustainable

development is perhaps the issues concerning migrants and refugees. In this
regard, we look forward to the international conference on migration, which
shall be held in December of this year in the city of Marrakesh. At that

conference, the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly, and Regular Migration will
be adopted. And, in the framework of the State of Kuwait's pursuit of whatever
contributes to the elevation of the styles of life, we have undertaken measures
to accord with the implementation of the agenda for sustainable development.
These measures had a priority over various national plans and programs, and
with the participation of all sectors of society. All of this has been concretized
by a futuristic national vision for "A New Kuwait" to be accomplished by 2035.
The aim of this vision is to transform Kuwait into a regional center, and a
financial, commercial, cultural, and institutional pioneer.
The State of Kuwait has been keen on shouldering its regional and
international responsibilities towards achieving development in all its
economic, social, and environmental perspectives. This is being done by
going through various long courses, with a view to putting into effect the
initiatives of His Highness, the Amir of the State of Kuwait, to advance
international partnerships. Such partnerships have come to complement the
continuous history of Kuwait in the developmental and humanitarian fields.

\r^t\

V

\

.

'

'••A

y^''T-~<r>i'^

'Diwan of
'fde frime Uimster

Stateof'Kuwait

^

^

In this regard, Kuwait has not spared any effort In Its striving for the
offering of developmental aid to developing countries, as well as least
developed countries. These states had so far numbered 106.
We perform our role as an active member of the United Nations through
our various Institutions, of which the most prominent Is the Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development, by offering grants and soft loans for
Infrastructure projects In the developing countries. The amount of such
assistance is more than double the Internationally agreed upon percentage for
formal development assistance.
I cannot but stress the adherence

of the

State of Kuwait to the

International multilateral system and to the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter. Here, we express our views In the Importance and
necessity of moving forward with all efforts guaranteeing the continuation and
the contribution of our cherished Organization, through having all States fulfill
their commitments and responsibilities to which they have consented under
agreements and International conferences. Thereby contributing towards
finding fair and just solutions to global threats and challenges. In this way, we
would have accomplished the lofty goal of the maintenance of International
peace and security.
In conclusion, I would like to express my thanks for your attention, and
apologize If my statement has taken too long.

The Peace, Mercy, and Blessings of Allah Be Upon You

10

