KYRGYZ REPUBLIC
Please check asainst delivef

STATEMENT

of H.E. Mr. Sooronbay Jeenbekov
President of the Kyrgyz Republic
at the General Debate

of the 73rd Session of the UN General Assembly

New York, 25 September 2018

Madam President,

Ladies and gentlemen,

I greet youwarmly on behalfof the freedom-loving and ancient people with the millennial history
of the Great Mountains!

From the high rostrum of the United Nations, I want to dwell on topical issues that the Kyrgyz
Republic considers urgent and require joint solutions at the national, regional and global levels.
Madam President,

Ladies and gentlemen.

Allow me to welcome all the participants of the 73rd session of the UN General Assembly on
behalf of the Kyrgyz Republic
The global political, economic and environmental situation is changing rapidly.
The tendency of regionalism in world politics is growing. Price increase, lack of liquidity, "war"
of sanctions in the economy is continuing. The threat of terrorism and extremism spreads to all countries.
Preservation of ecological balance has become a global task for the whole planet. Despite their origin
these issues are the matter of concern of everyone, especially small countries with open economies.
The above stated processes have been sensitive for Kyrgyzstan. Therefore, I believe that today it is
well-timed to discuss at the General Assembly the relevance of the United Nations for all people, as well
as global leadership and mutual responsibility for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies.
Using the high tribune of the UN, I would like to outline the issues of national, regional and global
level that are relevant from the position of our country.
Madam President,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

The peaceful transfer of power in the fall of 2017 laid a solid foundation for Kyrgyzstan's further
progressive democratic development. At present, there is political and social stability in Kyrgyzstan. This
gives us the opportunity to set ambitious goals for the medium term.
Kyrgyzstan stands for the development of parliamentary democracy in the country. The upcoming
parliamentary elections in 2020 will confirm this again. We are deeply convinced that it is the
parliamentary democracy that corresponds to the nature of the development of our society.
The fight against corruption remains a priority ofthe state policy of Kyrgyzstan.
As of today, we are facing the task of political modernization and economic development in
accordance with the future requirements.
First of all, we are focused on the implementation of Judicial and legal reform and the
reorganization of law enforcement agencies.
Sustainable development of all regions of Kyrgyzstan is the key to successful development, and
this is the most urgent issue for our country.
We set the task of improving the investment climate, started building an information society with
fair and transparent public administration.
Kyrgyzstan will continue to consistently strengthen democratic principles in the development of
the state. Public administration is focused on the needs of every person, ensuring his/her rights, freedoms
and justice in society.
All the above-mentioned reforms of the medium and long term are included in the National
Development Strategy of Kyrgyzstan until 2040. The provisions of the National Development Strategy
for the long-term period meet all the requirements of the UN Global Agenda 2030. In this connection we
hope for further support of the UN and partner countries on Kyrgyzstan's efforts in its development.
Kyrgyzstan remains committed to the implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals.
Ladies and gentlemen.
Strengthening the entire spectrum of cooperation between the countries of Central Asia, we
consider as the most important factor of ensuring security not only in the region, but also in the world. It
is gratifying to note that our cooperation has acquired a positive momentum and has reached a

fundamentally new level. The meetings of the Heads of States and Foreign Ministers of the countries of
Central Asia have become traditional.

For the Kyrgyz Republic, the issue of water use is extremely important. The practice of the last
decades of using water and energy resources in Central Asia shows the need to develop new approaches.
We are convinced that the integrated use of water and energy resources in the region should be
determined by a system of measures aimed at the sustainable development of all the Central Asian states.
Therefore, Kyrgyzstan has consistently advocated the development and implementation in Central Asia of
mutually beneficial economic mechanisms in this area.
Ladies and gentlemen,

Cooperation and comprehensive dialogue are considered by the Kyrgyz side as the only and
without alternative way of solving existing problems. In this context, we also see a special role and a new
mission of such regional organizations as the CIS, the SCO, the CSTO and the EEU. Today, overcoming
the isolation policy and developing the vector of cooperation and partnership have become very
important.
Madam President,

No state is immune from threats related to terrorism and extremism. The international community
must work together more actively to combat this scourge and such phenomena as drug trafficking,
trafficking in human beings and weapons, money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
This is very important for us, as we are at the crossroads of drug trafficking. Unfortunately, the
measures taken by the international community remain insufficient. It is important to pay special attention
to solving this common problem of the region.
Kyrgyzstan reaffirms its commitment to the effective implementation of the UN Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and supports the Joint Action Plan. Coordination of efforts of the states of the region
in matters of security, coordination and exchange of operational information is needed.
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic has approved the Program for Combating Extremism
and Terrorism until 2022. I thank the UN for its financial and technical assistance in the fight against
terrorism and drug trafficking, and we look forward to further support for development partners in matters
of security.
Madam President,

The transition to sustainable development is the restoration of natural ecosystems and the
environment. Kyrgyzstan recognizes climate change as a significant threat to exotic systems and people.
We committed ourselves to counteract this global phenomenon by signing the Paris Agreement.
Climate change is having an increasing impact on our glaciers and water resources, contributing to
the growth of natural disasters in the mountainous regions of the country. These are the main themes of
the fourth World Mountain Forum in Kyrgyzstan, organized to discuss new ways of development for the
prosperous future of mountain regions.
The main issue of regional nature in the sphere of ecology remains the problem of the legacy of
the radioactive industry of the Soviet era - uranium tailings. To solve this problem, Kyrgyzstan held a
number of international conferences. At the UN site on September 27, we hold an event dedicated to the
dangers of uranium mining. With the aim to enter a new stage of actions for reclamation of uranium
tailings, Kyrgyzstan is taking the initiative to update the UN General Assembly Resolution of 2013 '"The
Role ofthe International Community in Averting the Radiation Threat in Central Asia".
I would like to take this opportunity to thank our development partners, who render our country
significant support in solving this problem.
Ladies and Gentlemen,

The problems noted above require the joint work of all states, as well as global and regional
institutions. There is a need to create fundamentally new international mechanisms that are adequate to
modem challenges and threats. Our Organization needs changes, and this is already a requirement of time

and the present realities. This reform should be based on the principles of universality, broad geographical
representation and the widest possible support of the UN member states.
Kyrgyzstan seeks to make its contribution to the common cause of the United Nations for peace,
global security and sustainable development.
In order to draw the attention of the United Nations and the world to the problem of small states,
Kyrgyzstan has put forward its candidacy for non-permanent members of the UN Security Council for the
period 2027-2028. The support of countries that have not been elected to the UN Security Council will

give confidence in the equality of the members and thereby raise and strengthen the credibility of the
Organization.

Kyrgyzstan considers the UN as an authoritative and universal international organization.
Madam President,

Ladies and gentlemen,

It should be emphasized that an important factor in preserving peace, stability, development of
cultural diversity and tolerance is the deepening of intercultural dialogue. This was brilliantly and talently
written in works of our distinguished writer Chingiz Aitmatov. He made a significant contribution to
building peace and exchanging cultures between different peoples. This year, Kyrgyzstan and the whole
world celebrate the 90th anniversary of the birth of Chingiz Aitmatov.

The initiative of Kyrgyzstan to hold the World Nomad Games on a regular basis was recognized
and supported by the UN General Assembly. These games have shown that, despite all the complexities
and contradictionsof the modern world, the peoples of the world are striving for unity and creation.
Dear compatriots!

Our people considered independence to be the highest property and preserving freedom as the
apple ofthe eye found its worthy place in the world community.
Our Kyrgyzstan has been recognized as a sovereign state in the international arena.
As the great son of the Kyrgyz people, the famous writer, philosopher, humanist Chingiz

Aitmatov said "There is no greaterwealth for a man than to live together and peacefully." Only unity and
harmony will save the world! The unity of the people is the main guarantor of the sustainable
development of our country. Interethnic friendship in society and the responsible attitude of every citizen
for the destiny of the country is the basis of success. Our future and our happiness are an independent
Kyrgyzstan and the unity of the people! May God grant mercy to the people of Kyrgyzstan and let peace
reign in our land! I wish every citizen of the country health, luck, a happy and peaceful life.
Long live our independent, free Kyrgyzstan!
Thank you

