Lao geopfe's (Democrotic Wpuflfic
Statement by

H.E. Mr. Saleumxay Kommasith, Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, at the 73'd Session

of the United Nations General Assembly

29 September 2018, New York

Madame President,

I would like to begin by congratulating you, Ms. Maria Femanda Espinosa

of

Garc6s on your election as President
General Assembly.

the 73'd Session of the United Nations

It is our great pleasure to see a woman chairing this august

body and I assure you of our full support and cooperation and wish you every
success

in discharging

your noble duty. Likewise,

I

wish

to extend my

congratulations to His Excellency Miroslav Laj(:6k for the successful completion

of his tenure as President of the 72nd Session of the UNGA.

Madame President,

The 2030 Agenda that promises to leave no one behind has encompassed all

the prerequisites for us all to build a peaceful and prosperous world. In order to

meet this lofty goal

of

2030 Agenda, the national governments and the

international community have to work hand in hand to implement it and it requires

international peace and security that would create conducive environment for
economic growth and social progress, while enhancing international cooperation
and assistance with priorities given to the most vulnerable groups of countries,
namely LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS.

To realize the 2030 Agenda and achieve the SDGs, the Lao Government has
incorporated the SDG targets into

its

8th five-year National Socio-Economic

Development Plan for 2016-2020 soon after the adoption of the Agenda 2030.
Given its specific need, the Lao PDR has gone extra mile by adopting the national

SDG 18 entitled "Lives Safe from Unexploded Ordnance (IIXO)" to address the
problem caused by UXO. At the High-level Political Forum held in July this year,

the Lao Government presented its first Voluntary National Review on SDGs
L

implementation, which saw important progress and emerging constraints over the
past years.

While positive momentum has been gained on SDGs and LDC graduation,
the Lao PDRremains vulnerable to external shocks. This year, we are witnessing

an increasing intensity of climate change and natural disasters that cause heavy
loss and damage to lives and properties of people in different parts of the world.

Like many countries, the Lao PDR is no exception and has been severely affected

by natural disaster especially extensive flooding across the country. This is the
worst natural disaster ever occurred in the history of our country. To date, 2.409

out of 8.464 villages

in

115 out

of

148 districts have been affected by massive

floods. The exact costs of the loss and damage are yet to be known as Post Disaster
Need Assessment

will be conducted in the very coming months. This calamity

has

severely caused major impact on the livelihood of the people in the affected areas.

Currently, the Lao Government,

with

assistance

from friendly

countries,

international organizations including INGOs and individuals have provided
emergency relief to the affected people such as the provision of temporary shelters,

food and health care. May I, therefore, take this opportunity to express our heartfelt
appreciations and gratitude to the friendly countries and intemational organizations

for their valuable assistance provided to us during this difficult time.
Against this backdrop, it is more crucial than ever for world leaders to honor

our commitments pledged in the Paris Agreement. Within ASEAN,

great

importance is given to the issue of climate change and disaster risk management.

We also highly value the UN's continued support for ASEAN-IIN Joint Strategic

Plan of Action on Disaster Management 2016-2020

in addressing the climate

change and disaster management and responding to its impacts on socio-economic

development in the years to come.
2

Madame President,

To address the scourge of transnational crime, it requires concerted effort at

all levels. In this context, the Lao PDR remains highly committed to working
closely with the international community in the fights against illicit drug, illegal

wild life trade, trafficking in persons, among others. The Government has adopted
the Drug Control Master Plan 2016-2020 as we implement the ASEAN Work Plan
on Securing Community Against

Illicit Drugs 2016-2025 so as to realize the vision

of Drug Free ASEAN as one of high-priority agenda of the region. We are also

to support the "Global Call to Action on the World Drug Problem",
initiated by the President of the United States. In our fight against human

pleased

trafficking, the Government has spared no effort in combating this heinous and
inhumane crime by adopting several laws, regulations and national action plans to

combat trafficking

in persons and becoming signatory to

numerous regional

Agreements and MOUs, including the ASEAN Convention Against Trafficking in
Persons, especially Women and Children, that seek to prevent and combat human

trafficking.

Madame President,

The United Nations needs to be strengthened so it can respond effectively to
the challenges we face today. We are pleased with the initiatives by the Secretary
General on reforming and repositioning of the UN with the aim to improve UN

capability

to meet the needs in the current environment. In this context, we

reiterate our view that development issues must remain at the core, be an integral

part and a top priority for the United Nations and member states while promoting
international peace, security and human rights. While emphasizing the importance

of enhancing capacity of the tIN system to deliver its mandate, we are concerned
3

about the continued decline of the contribution to the core funding to the UN
agencies. If this trend continues,

it will affect the performance of the UN

development agencies and development programs on the ground. Therefore, my
delegation would like to call on donor countries to fuIfiIl their ODA commitment

of at least 0.7% of their GNI.

Madame President,

We all acknowledge that peace and security are prerequisites for socioeconomic development of all nations. Therefore, we need to maintain and promote
peace and security

X all costs. Past experiences have shown that settling

disputes

by peaceful means is the best way to ensure durable peace that is essential for
sustainable development

of a nation. As

such,

it is incumbent upon the

international community to fuither build mutual trust and confidence in an effort to

jointly overcome the on-going challenges and seek peaceful solutions to

the

disputes or conflicts that we are witnessing in various regions of the world. Against

this backdrop, we welcome the recent historic Summit between the Leaders of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the United States of America in June

this year which constitutes an importart milestone in the relations between the two
countries. We also welcome the 3'd Summit between the leaders of the Republic

of

of Korea with an objective

to

Korea and the Democratic People's Republic

improve not only bilateral relations between the two countries, but also to address
the issue of denuclearization on the Korean Peninsula. We hope that such positive
momentum

will be strengthened, thereby, contributing to the maintenance of peace

and stability, and denuclearization in the region as a whole.

While there is positive development in the Korean Peninsula, my delegation

is of concern on the lack of progress on the Palestinian issue. We hope that this
4

long overdue issue on Palestine will be resolved by peaceful means in order to
achieve a two-state solution where Palestine and Israel can live side by side in
peace, security and

within internationally reaognrzed borders as stipulated in the

relevant UN Security Council Resolutions.

On the other note, in the era of interdependence, intemational cooperation
and engagement are key factors for peaceful and mutually benefited co-existence.

The enforcement of isolation and sanction measures imposed on any country may

not bring about benefits to the international community. On the contrary, it will
cause a loss

for all and lead to increasing hostility. In this regard, my delegation

urges that the embargo on the Republic of Cuba be ended. We would like also to

call on the international community to uphold and fuither strengthen
multilateralism that will promote cooperation rather than confrontation. This
remains one of the core values

of our only universal organizalion, the United

Nations.
Madame President,

I would like to conclude by express my support to the theme for the 73rd
session of the UNGA: Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Globql

leadership and shared responsibilities
societies,

for peaceful, equitable and sustainable

It is indeed pertinent to the current global situation and the work of the

United Nations. However, to make all of the internationally agreed goals and
commitments a reality,

it requires strong political will and firm commitment

and

support for multilateralism, particularly to make the United Nations stronger than

before so that

it can effectively serve and respond to the needs of all member

states.

I thank you.

5

