Check against delivery

Permanent Mission of Latvia to the United Nations

333 East 50"" Street, New York, NY 10022
Telephone (1 212) 838-8877
E-mail: mission.un-ny@mfa.gov.lv

Statement by H.E. Mr. Edgars Rinkevics
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Latvia

the 73rd session of the United Nations General

Assembly

United Nations, New York

29 September 2018

Madam President,
Excellencies,

Distinguished Delegates,

I wish to congratulate Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces on

assuming the post of President of the current session of the
General Assembly and provide assurances of Latvia's full

support. I also express gratitude to Mr. Miroslav Lajcak for his
active role as President of previous Session of the UN General
Assembly.

Distinguished Delegates!

I address this Assembly in a very special time for my country.

This year, Latvia is celebrating its centennial. A remarkable
change occurred one hundred years ago. The end of World War I

and collapse of empires resulted in the liberation of nations and
brought about a fundamental revision of Europe's political map.

A new Europe was bom which promised much more than just
self-determination, freedom and democracy. The peoples of

Europe expected lasting peace and prosperity. These objectives
were pursued both individually and collectively. Peoples' right to
self-determination materialized in concrete forms. New nationstates were bom.

The Paris Peace conference laid the foundation for the League of
Nations. It was the first international organisation whose
principal mission was to maintain universal peace through the
development of binding norms and multilateralism. Latvia also

joined the League of Nations firmly establishing its status as a

full-fledged member of the international family. However, the
weakness of the League of Nations was one of the main reasons

why Latvia for a time lost its independence.

The history of both Soviet and Nazi occupations of Latvia and
much of the European continent is a harsh reminder of what

happens when serious violations of international law are
tolerated. We know all too well the consequences of allowing

countries to break these principles with impunity. In Latvia's
case, it was a life under occupation by Nazi and Communist

regimes of terror and gross violations of human rights.

We are grateful to all those nations that for decades implemented
policies of non-recognition of the occupation of the Republic of
Latvia and stuck to their principles.

In accordance with

international law, the state of Latvia continued existing

throughout the occupation period.

However, the Russian Federation, the official successor of the

Soviet Union still does not acknowledge well-documented facts

of history. I call on Russia to embrace the truth and to clearly
condemn the actions of the Soviet Union.

Since the restoration of independence in 1991, Latvia has been

advocating compliance with international law and human rights.
The protection of these principles was needed throughout the
transition to a democratic society governed by the rule of law, and

in building Latvia's role internationally.

Excellencies!

The topic ofthis year's debate invites us to focus on the very heart
of the United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations starts

with the words "We the peoples of the United Nations", thus

pointing out the aim of the organization to represent rights and
interests of every human being on the planet.

The United Nations was founded not only to save succeeding

generations from the scourge of war and to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, but also to respect the obligations of
international law.

Human rights, including women's rights and children's rights, are
among the most fundamental values of the United Nations. The
organization must be capable of defending these values in any
situation: be it bombing of civilians in Syria, massacres of
Rohingyas in Myanmar, persecution of Crimean Tatars by
Russian authorities, or other human rights violations wherever
they occur.

This year, we mark 70 years since the adoption of the Universal

Declaration of Human Rights. It remains the main global source
for inspiration to continue the work to ensure that all people may
live with dignity and benefit from the blessings of freedom and
equality.

Security and human rights go hand in hand. Security cannot be
achieved without respect for human rights and fundamental

freedoms. A free press has been, and continues to be vital for
peace, justice and human rights for all.

Hence, I once again urge Russia to release illegally detained
Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov who enters day 139 of his

hunger strike today. I call on Myanmar authorities to free two
Reuters journalists Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo.

I also call on Russia to immediately release other 64 Ukrainian

political prisoners it has detained including journalist Roman
Sushchenko.

I urge nations to adhere to their commitments and obligations
under international law and human rights, especially regarding

freedom of expression and freedom of assembly, which have
notably deteriorated the past year.

Distinguished Delegates!

In order to strengthen the role of the United Nations, efforts

should be made to uphold the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In August, the world lost an inspirational leader, a strong
advocate for peace and human rights, the former SecretaryGeneral Kofi Annan, who argued that "we will not enjoy security

without development, [nor] enjoy development without security,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights."

The three pillars of the Charter are greater than the sum of their
individual parts. Economic progress and sustainable development
are based on a long-term stability, which in turn requires peace

and security, and respect for human rights.

Excellencies!

The United Nations must be able to change, to undertake serious

reforms and therefore to respond to the 2V^ century accordingly.
We

need

a

relevant

and

efficient

United

Nations.

Latvia welcomes the reforms initiated by the Secretary General

in the three areas of peace and security, development, and

management. It is important that reforms are implemented
swiftly.

This is a unique organisation with a heavy responsibility. The
authority of the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security must be preserved. Security Council reform is
long overdue, and we should all aim for strengthening the
legitimacy of this important body.

However, stalemate in the Security Council reform must not

impede progress elsewhere. The UN reform must include serious
improvements in the protection and promotion of human rights.
Achieving sustainable development through the implementation

of the UN 2030 Agenda cannot be complete without the
strengthening of human rights around the world.

The Human Rights Council must be strong, effective and must

have the ability to quickly react to serious human rights violations
in any part ofthe world. Latvia is actively engaged in the process

of improving the effectiveness of the Human Rights Council. I
invite all countries to join this process with an open mind.

Latvia supports the Secretary General's vision and approach for
the prevention-focussed United Nations. This is even more
important given the increasingly complex global security
challenges we face. Unprevented conflicts and crises around the
world drag on for years and decades, destroying human lives,
holding back development and draining the resources of the UN.
10

The conflicts in Syria, and Ukraine and Yemen continue to take
a heavy toll on civilians. We must also not forget about the

protracted instability in Burundi and Afghanistan. The mere

length of preventable conflicts undermines the credibility of
international organizations, including the United Nations.

The UN Security Council, as the main guarantor of international

peace and security, has a particular responsibility in preventing
conflicts, acts of aggression, and mass atrocities. The use of the
veto to shield narrow national interests in situations of mass

atrocities is totally unacceptable.

Territorial integrity and sovereignty as enshrined in the purposes
and principles of the UN Charter must be respected by all. The
Russian Federation must stop its aggression against Ukraine.

Latvia together with international community will maintain
non-recognition policy concerning the illegal annexation of
Crimea.

11

I believe that one day international law and justice will prevail,

and territorial integrity of Ukraine, as well as of other European
Union's eastern partners, will be restored. The United Nations,
along with the relevant regional players, must remain involved

and committed to resolving protracted conflicts in NagornoKarabakh, Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The history

ofthe Baltic countries is proofofthe moral power of international
law and justice. The international community must be more active
in solving these issues.

No nation was ever secure in isolation. Therefore, Member States

have a responsibility for one another's security.

The clear

consequences for the aggressor, resolute international pressure
and accountability for violations of international law are essential

for political resolution of the conflict. A settlement of protracted
conflicts in wider Europe remains of utmost importance for the
international community.

12

Reaching the Sustainable Development Goals is the ultimate

prevention agenda. They address the drivers and root causes of
instability and conflict. Investing in human dignity, eradicating

poverty, fostering climate resilience and promoting economic and
social progress will reduce the incidence of conflict, instability
and despair.

Therefore, the principles ofgood governance, democracy, respect

for

human

rights,

gender

equality

and

environmental

sustainability guide all Latvia's activities of development
cooperation. Furthermore, gender equality is vital for achieving
sustainable development goals. It is an essential precondition for
inclusive sustainable development as well as for economic
growth and prosperity.

13

Distinguished Delegates!

At the beginning of the 20th century, combatants accounted for
90% of conflict related casualties. Today, 90% of casualties in
armed conflicts are civilians. Conventional arms kill around 500

thousand people per year, out of which 70 thousand are killed in
conflict zones. These figures clearly prove that the international

community must focus not only on weapons of mass destruction
but also on conventional arms.

With that in mind Latvia assumed the Presidency of the Arms

Trade Treaty for next year and will spare no effort to promote its

objectives. I call on all States to become parties to the Arms Trade
Treaty, which would also contribute in a direct way to attainment
of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda.

14

We must join our efforts to strengthen the principle of
multilateralism. In an interdependent and globalized world we

can address and resolve global problems only through multilateral

means. In this regard, the UN stands out as a good global

governance instrument, but it is not a global government. The
ability ofthe United Nations to meet the challenges ofthe present

world depends heavily on the decisions of governments and on
the support of populations for these decisions.

With this, I want to emphasize that the future of multilateralism

will depend more on changes in the attitude ofmember states than
on reforms of the UN system. However, until the fundamental
characteristics of the international system are not changed, the

UN can only strive for higher effectiveness and efficiency.

15

Distinguished Delegates!

We should admit the United Nations for what it is. It is not

perfect. Yet it is very necessary instrument for maintenance of

peace, economic development, codification of international law,
for a more secure world.

The United Nations can be and must be a significant global

player, a community of nations proud of its values, committed to
multilateralism and the principles of international law.

The member states must support our organization to project these
values worldwide thus affirming its unique role on the global

stage. To achieve that purpose the UN needs well-functioning
norms, efficient institutions and clear vision about its policies.

Thank you for your attention!

16

