A
STATEMENT BY THE RIGHT HO OURABLE THE PRIME
MI ISTE OF THE KI GDO OF LESOTHO

D . OTSO HAE HO AS THAB E
DELIVE ED T THE 73rd SESSIO OF THE U ITED

ATIONS GE E AL SSE BLY
E YO

U ITED STATES OF AME IC
28 SEPTE BE , 2018

Check Against Delivery

Your Excellency President of the 73rd Session of the
General Assembly,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres , Secretary General

of the United Nations,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen.

Allow me at the outset to sincerely congratulate you, Madam
President, for your well-deserved election as the fourth woman to
ascend to the highest seat at the United Nations. In as much as
we are happy about this reality, we are, however, certainly not
proud of our record. Out of seventy three (73) General Assembly
Presidents, we only have four that are women to date.
Nevertheless, all is not lost. We must resolve to walk our talk and
ensure that women get the same opportunities as men, in line

with the spirit of the UN Charter.

I assure you of my delegation s full support Madam President.
Your impeccable credentials and experience spanning over two
decades in the multilateral setting, assure us of a successful 73rd
session. It would be remiss of me not to commend your

predecessor, H.E. Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, for his distinct
leadership in the previous session.
I also wish to thank the Secretary General for his report on the

Work of the Organisation which outlines the state of our United
Nations.

Madam Presi ent,

The World history is replete of incidences of lack of peace since
time immemorial. It speaks of conflict between brothers and
sisters - wars between and within nations. Terrorism and violence

have disrupted and displaced families, while economic
devastations have torn countless people apart. Natural disasters
such as Earthquakes, floods, tornadoes, due to climate change,
have taken their toll on humanity. Injustice continues to
permeate through countries, and societies are left devoid of hope
for a prosperous, free, peaceful and just world. As new wars and
civil unrests seem to be flaring up every week, our people look up
to us as their Leaders for solutions, and they yearn for help from
the United Nations.

It is in the above context, Madam President, that we welcome the

theme for this Session; Making the United Nations Relevant

to All People: Global Leadership and Shared
Responsibilities for Peaceful Equitable and Sustainable
Societies . The theme speaks to the very principles

underpinning the formation of the United Nations. The United
Nations Charter puts People at the center of the UN with the
following words in its preamble: "We the Peoples of the
United Nations". The big question today is, have we, for more
than seven decades now, put the People at the center of our
efforts as an organization?
As the session of 51 delegates who came from across the world
to adopt the UN Charter in 1945 came to a conclusion, the then
President of the United States, Harry Truman, said:

" The Charter of the United Nations which you have just
signed is a solid structure upon which we can build a better
world...Between the victory in Europe and the final victory, in this
most destructive of all wars, you have won a victory against war
itself... With this Charter the world can begin to look forward to

the time when all worthy human beings may be permitted to live
decently as free people

For the past 73 years now we have been standing behind this
rostrum making commitments and inspiring hope among the
citizens of the world. However, our rhetoric has not been

matched with actions. Our fidelity to the principles enshrined in
the UN Charter remains a concern. Seven decades on, we are still
embroiled in vicious conflict and violence. A world envisioned by
our forebears - a world where worthy human beings may be
permitted to live decently as free peopid', continues to elude us.
The multilateral system seems to provide no sustainable solution
to the multifaceted challenges that confront our world, while
unilateralism is on the rise. These challenges put to the test the
trust that humanity has on the United Nations. Their hope that
future generations shall be saved from the scourge of war, which
has twice in our lifetime brought untold sorrow to humanity , is
further receding from sight.

Madam Chair,

The above scenario that I have just painted is a reality. Even so,
the centrality and relevance of the United Nations cannot be
challenged. The World could not have been the same without the

UN. Imperfect as it might be, its positive impact on the lives of

countless people is a fact that cannot be denied. From feeding
over 104 million people in over 80 countries every year, to
assisting millions of refugees and protecting women and children,

to fighting poverty, HIV and AIDS and to restoring calm through
peacekeeping initiatives, the UN has undoubtedly made a
difference in the lives of global citizens.

When addressing this Assembly during the 72nd Session, I did so
with a heavy heart as there was a dark cloud of instability and
insecurity hovering over my Country. But, today I stand before
you to attest to the difference the UN can make in people s lives.

With the help of the UN, SADC, African Union (AU) and other
Development Partners, we are on the path towards changing the

trajectory of a vicious circle of instability and volatile security in
Lesotho. The Kingdom of Lesotho is now embarking on a

Comprehensive National Reforms agenda that will culminate with
the calibration of pivotal elements of Government and thereby
achieve the tenets of the National Vision 2020. Our shared
commitment as a Nation to transform the Mountain Kingdom into
a just, prosperous and stable country, marked by effective and
people-focused institutions; national unity of purpose; rule of law,
good governance and human rights, shall be attained.

Our resolve to build a safe, more stable and secure country is
propelled by the fact that peace and security are pre-conditions to
development. We are determined to take charge of our socio¬
economic transformation as a country in line with the African

Union Agenda 2063 as well as the UN Agenda 2030, premised
upon the principle of inclusivity and leaving no one behind. We
do, however, note the importance that financing plays in any

attempt to achieve the goals enshrined in both Agenda 2063 and
Agenda 2030. While we acknowledge that Official Development
Assistance (ODA) remains a catalyst for development, we also
advocate for robust domestic resource mobilization. This is the
path that we are venturing on as a Country. We are determined
to combat illicit financial flows, strengthen tax administration and
harness remittances.

In line with our National priorities, we are taking substantive
steps towards providing an appropriate space for private sector
investment and entrepreneurship as a complement to public
investments. An Industrial Hub has been launched in the

Northern district, which will create job opportunities for about
14,000 people once fully operational, and where private property
investors will be invited to build factory shells.

We cannot also ignore the disturbing issue of migration. We all
know that the movement of persons across borders is a
phenomenal issue. It is our considered view that migration is one
area in which opportunities for skilled and surplus labour can be
explored. To this end, my Government is working closely with
International Partners to achieve developmental outcomes which
are related to migration. Further to this, a National Consultative

Committee (NCC) was set up to deal with a range of migrationrelated matters including, inter alia; the development of a
strategic plan on migration and development.

Encapsulated in the plans are interventions aimed at enhancing
the proper utilization of remittances from the Diaspora. We,
therefore, need to embrace migrants at the global level on their
contribution towards the economic development of both their
countries and host countries. We find it disturbing that migrants
across the world continue to face challenges of unprecedented
magnitude. We call upon all concerned to adhere to the Global

Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. We look
forward to the endorsement of the Compact in December of this
year.

7

Madam Chair,
Peace and prosperity cannot be achieved when women and girls
are marginalized and not given the opportunity to contribute to
development. The role of women and other disadvantaged
sectors of our communities in advancing the global development
agenda must be further enhanced. Equally important is to

underline that the protection of human rights is a noble objective
of the international community that must not be politicized,
redefined or even subjected to double standards in accordance
with the whims and caprices of a few powerful states in pursuit of
their individual agenda.
On the African Continent, we are today, more than ever before,

determined to rid ourselves of conflict by settling disputes
through peaceful means. The warring parties in South Sudan
have finally brokered a Peace Deal. The developments in the horn
of Africa offer hope for a prosperous and peaceful region. In
particular, the normalisation of relations between Ethiopia and

Eritrea, through the signing of the peace deal and opening of
Embassies in those Countries' respective Capitals, will usher in a
new era of peace with concomitant huge economic, humanitarian
and strategic implications for the region.
8

We continue to be saddened, however, by the situation in
Western Sahara. Western Sahara continues to be the only colony
on the African Continent. The suffering of the Saharawi People
has been going on for far too long now. They deserve to be
afforded an opportunity to voice out their aspirations for
independence through an independent and equal suffrage.

Lesotho shall continue to stand with them in their pursuit for
emancipation.

While the Palestinian People s plight continues to worsen, the
hope for the resolution of the crises in Syria and Iraq continues to
diminish. We cannot remain indifferent to the suffering of these
innocent people. Unilateral actions that defy international
agreements and the United Nations Resolutions will only worsen
the situation of the Palestinians. A two state solution, with

Palestine and Israel living side by side in peace and harmony,
remains the only viable option for settlement of the Palestine
Question. Attainment of peace is a process that requires
engagement, accommodation and genuineness. Peace cannot be

attained by war or oppression. All of us joined this Organisation
voluntarily and professing Love for Peace. Our actions must,
equally, reflect that commitment.

In the same vein, the economic and commercial embargo on
Cuba continues to weigh heavily on our conscience. There is no

doubt that this measure has had negative impact on the People
and economy of Cuba. It is our appeal that the embargo be lifted
and Cuba be reintegrated into the world trading system.
Madam President,

In today s globalized world, it is indefensible and
incomprehensible that decisions which bind us all are left in the
hands of a few Member States. Our advocacy for democratization
of the United Nations must be intensified. Reform of the Security
Council, which takes into account the aspirations of Africa, as
espoused in the Ezulwini Consensus, cannot be postponed any
longer. Transparency, inclusivity and democracy must inform the
work of the entire United Nations system.

Equally important is to underscore that the gains made in the
field of disarmament are being eroded gradually. Small arms and

light weapons continue to flood the illegal market. The threat of
the use of weapons of mass destruction has re-emerged, and the

United Nations is left paralysed due to the size and power
configuration of the current Security Council, making the call for
the reform of this body even more urgent.
10

As I conclude, Madam President, allow me to indicate that Yes,

the United Nations has to a very large extend attempted to put
people at the center of its core business. However, more still
needs to be done. My appeal to you all is to shun those who seek
to divide and incite us against one another. It is through our

solidarity, more than anything else, that the UN will thrive and
successfully put humanity at the center of its activities. The

United Nations is the only platform that affords us to embrace
true multilateralism.
At the same time, let us remember that even though we might
have a shared vision and determined leadership to address peace,
equity and sustainability challenges, the truth, however, is that
we are mortal beings with intellectual and other constraints. As
such, we need to acknowledge that there is Devine Power above
from whence emanates true wisdom. Let us, therefore, keep our

communication lines with God open in order to find real and
lasting solutions to the world problems that so often besiege us.

I THANK YOU

11

