CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

STATEMENT

HIS EXCELLENCY MR. GEORGE MANNEH WEAK
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA

AT THE 73'^'' SESSION
OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS
NEW YORK, USA

SEPTEMBER 26, 2018

H.E. Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces,

President of the 73*^^ Session of the United Nations General Assembly;
H. E. Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations;
Excellencies,
Delegations;

Heads

of State and

Government,

and

Heads

of

Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen:

I am honored to address this 73^^ Session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations, on behalf of the Government and People of Liberia.
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you. Madam President, and the
Government and people of Ecuador, for your election as President of the

73^^ Session of this august Assembly. With our eyes on history, Liberia
takes special note, and hails your selection, as the fourth woman President
of the General Assembly.

Let me also express appreciation to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
whose dynamism and farsighted leadership continues to strengthen the
United Nations in the face of perennial global challenges.
Madame President, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen:

Just two weeks ago, we joined millions in Ghana and around the world to
bid a final farewell to former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, devoted his
life to peacemaking and conflict resolution, a calling at which he was
renowned and successful.

With his passing, Africa has lost one of its most illustrious sons, and the
world has lost one of the most outstanding diplomats of our time. May his
soul rest in perfect peace.

1 IPa ge

Madam President, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen:

Late last year, Liberians participated in Presidential and Legislative
elections, the results of which represented a major shift in the underlying
fundamentals of the Liberian political dynamic.

In an orderly, lawful, and peaceful manner, Liberians voted in
overwhelming numbers for a Change for Hope. This was the first time in 73

years, that Liberians enjoyed a peaceful transfer of power from one
democratically-elected Government to another.
At the end of the long campaign, when the results were announced after
the run-off, it became clear that the pendulum had swung in the direction of

youthful leadership, and that the paradigm had shifted in favor of change
and transformation.

The United

Nations and

its various bodies,

as well as regional

organizations and many of our bilateral partners and friends, were direct
witnesses to the maturity of the Liberian electorate, our respect for law and
order, and the successful institutionallzation of the democratic processes.
As Standard Bearer of the winning Coalition for Democratic Change, the
mantle and responsibility of leading this transformation therefore devolved

upon me, when I was inaugurated as the 24"" President of Liberia on
January 22, 2018.

The challenges of leadership are enormous, but in each and every one of
these challenges, I see opportunities to make things better, and to bring
permanent improvements to the lives of all Liberians, as we devise policies
and programs that will have a lasting and positive impact on the lives of our
citizens.

2 I Pa ge

Madam President:

The umbrella program under which we intend to pursue prosperity is the
Pro-Poor Agenda for Development and Prosperity (PAPD), our National
Development Plan for the next five years.
This is not an Agenda only for the poor; it is for the benefit of all Liberians.
But it is a policy framework that gives priority to the alleviation of poverty,
and its core objective and focus is to reduce the marginalization of the most
vulnerable, whilst at the same time creating a conducive atmosphere for
the middle and upper income Liberian to grow and prosper.
We want to build a harmonious society, based on the goal of economic
empowerment, especially for the underprivileged. Our Pro-Poor Agenda is
therefore designed to give power to the people, promote economic
diversification, protect sustainable peace and encourage good governance.
We appeal to our friends, bilateral partners, and private investors to support
this agenda.
Madame President:

As we focus on action plans to implement our development agenda, we are
acutely aware of the vulnerability of our youthful population, who are clearly
disadvantaged as a result of high unemployment, and a lack of access to
quality education opportunities.
Our plan is to reverse their unfortunate situation and make them productive
citizens through the provision of adequate educational facilities at the high
school and college levels, for those who still have interest in pursuing
academic programs. For those youths left behind due to the disastrous civil
crisis and who have outgrown their school years, my government is

3 IPa ge

investing in Technical Vocational Education and Training programs to build
their entrepreneurial and marketable skill-sets.

Being conscious of the importance and impact of infrastructure on social
and economic development, my government has identified investment in
roads, energy and ports as our key priority, and is therefore soliciting
funding and other technical expertise to undertake these projects in pursuit
of our goal to connect our cities and towns, and power our economy.
Agriculture, Liberia's comparative advantage, has also been identified as
one of our major poverty-alleviation instruments because it will lead us to
self-sufficiency in food production and self-employment, as well as open
doors for industrialization. With the implementation of a new Special
Economic Zone law, we intend to attract labor-intensive light
manufacturing.
Madame President:

Drawing from the experience of the 2014 Ebola Epidemic that took the lives
of thousands of Liberians and Health workers, we intend to efficiently and
properly organize our healthcare delivery system, to ensure that the health
and wellbeing of our people is improved.
Finally, we are placing emphasis on national security in order to enable our
people move and live freely without fear. With the recent withdrawal of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Mission in Liberia, we are now in charge of
our own security. We thank you for the sacrifices that you have made in
securing and maintaining the peace in Liberia after our protracted civil
conflict.

In this regard, we would like to express our personal appreciation to Mr.
Farid Zarif of Afghanistan who, as Special Representative for Liberia and
the last Head of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) from 2015
4 IPa ge

to 2018, superintended an orderly withdrawal of troops, while
simultaneously securing the peaceful environment that allowed a very
robust political campaign to take place without incident.
Madam President:

My country has finally turned the corner, with more years of peace than the
preceding years of war, guided by our Peace Agreement signed in Accra
15 years ago. We thank the members and the Security Council of the
United Nations for the UNMIL Peacekeeping Mission which brought
stability and helped us rebuild our institutions and communities. We are a
Peacekeeping success story, and we are grateful for the support given.

But a nation which has experienced civil war must never take peace for
granted, or forget the long shadow that years of conflict still cast over
people's lives. We must realize and appreciate that ours is still a fragile
peace.

Our people across the country still bear the scars of conflict. We therefore
intend to initiate a series of National Peace Dialogues throughout Liberia.
We must restart those difficult conversations at the local level, and include
our youth, so that they - and we - do not repeat the costly mistakes of the
past.

It is clear to me that these frank exchanges are an essential step in
bringing lasting healing, reconciliation, and unity to our people. Our
agenda is not one of division, but rather, it is an agenda that intends to
provide an enabling environment for a united people to be able to benefit
and prosper from the economic dividends of peace.

Madam President:

5 IPa ge

We reaffirm our support to the United Nations in striving to achieve global
peace and security, good governance and the advancement of the principle
of universal human rights. We further reiterate our commitment to the rule
of law, the alleviation of poverty, gender equality, the elimination of genderbased violence, and the empowerment of women, girls and young people.
Liberia, which has been a beneficiary of regional support, knows the
relevance of regional solidarity. In this regard we have emphasized the fight
against organized crime, especially cross-border trade in illicit substances,
and small and light weapons, drugs, human trafficking, piracy and the
activities of non-state actors which threaten to undermine peace and
security within the ECOWAS region.
Madam President;

With your support, we will do all we can to make our people feel
comfortable at home, and to develop love and respect for one another. We
pledge to vigorously work within our regional organizations such as the AU,
ECOWAS and the Mano River Union to foster peace, security, and stability
in our region, and for our peoples.
I thank you.

6 I Pa g e

