PERMANENT MISSION
OF THE PRINCIPALITY OF LIECHTENSTEIN
TO THE UNITED NATIONS
NEWYORK

NEW YORK1

27 SEPTEMBER 2018

UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY1 73 RD SESSION
GENERAL DEBATE

STATEMENT BY

H.E. Ms. AURELIA FRICK

FOREIGN MINISTER OF THE PRINCIPALITY OF LIECHTENSTEIN

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
633ThirdAvenue I 27th Hoor] NewYorkl NY10017/ T +1 (212)599 0220 I F+1 (212)599 0064 I mission@nyc.Jlv.Ji I www.newyork./iechtenstein.li

Madame President, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen

It is a great joy and personal satisfaction to me to see a woman preside over this
Assembly. It is the tenth time that I have the honor to speak in this historic hal/.
And it is the first time in all those years that a woman holds the highest office
here at the United Nations. I salute your leadership - and we will support you.
But it is also disappointing to see that the UN - which should be a trailblazer on
the empowerment of women - so frequently misses opportunities to make
appointments that resonate outside this building. All the more, I thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his commitment to gender parity. His resolve has
illustrated that this goal is achievable - and relatively quickly. We have yet to
realize full gender equality in practice back home, in Liechtenstein. And we will
continue looking at the UN for setting examples that guide us on our own path.

Madame President

The United Nations is the most important peace project the world has ever
seen. The UN has shaped the way we have lived together for over seven
decades. It was created out of the belief that the world could not afford another
armed

confrontation

of

the

most

powerful

States,

with

devastating

consequences for everybody. It was created on the basis of a collective system
for the maintenance of international peace and security - based on common
values and common purposes.

2

The early years of the work of the United Nations illustrate the enthusiasm with
which States seized the opportunity they had created for themselves. There was
a strong focus on the most painful open wounds caused in World War II. The
true dimensions of the horror of the Holocaust gradually became public
knowledge, not least through the trials in Nuremberg. As a result, the Genocide
Convention was adopted. Under the vivid impressions of the horrors of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the General Assembly - in its very first resohrtion

s-

set

the goal of eliminating all nuclear weapons. That is a goal we are far from
achieving, and the path has so far been rough. But we have finally chartered the
way forward -in adopting the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
last year. I congratulate the 17 countries which have already ratified the treaty.
We will do our best to follow suit.

The United Nations has also been the place where we developed human rights
standards - the rules that guide the relationship between the State and the
human person, individually and collectively. The Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was at the beginning of this inspiring trajectory. Eleanore Roosevelt, one
. of my personal rolernodels, made a decisive contribution to its conclusion. 70
years later, there can be no question that every individual on this planet is
entitled to enjoy all the rights reflected in it. An impressive number of
groundbreaking treaties were built on this basis - a very proud record. More
than anything else, the human rights area reflects the spirit of the UN Charter­
written on behalf of the peoples, not Governments.

3

Development became another key mission in this building. In fact, for many in
the membership, the United Nations is the most important platform in this
respect. This as well is an agenda that we shaped together - we agreed on the
right to development. And we made it clear that development, hu man rights
and peace and security belong together. The coronation of this effort are the
Sustainable Development Goals that will guide our work until 2030. They offer a
historic opportunity. We owe it to our children not to miss it.

The challenge of climate change illustrates perfectly clear that the United
Nations is the indispensable organization. We ourselves have created a threat to
our sheer existence - as the human race, as individuals. This threat knows no
national borders, makes no distinction. We are all equally affected. We can only
overcome it together. Our very survival is at stake. And yet, we are significantly
behind what is necessary to do. The Secretary-General is right to sound the
alarm. It is his responsibility. It is up to us - all of us - to act.

Madame President

All of this can only lead to one conclusion: We need more United Nations, not
iess

>

more effective, more cooperative, more dynamic, more in tune with the

times we live in. And yet, we are distracted iii this effort. There are tendencies
to revert to a paradigm that led to enormous suffering in the past - and would
certainly be disastrous today. Willful blindness, ignoring the realities, denying
the facts and appealing to fear and resentment are recipes for disaster. We have
witnessed a downward spiral in this conversation. It has been rapid and led us to
4

a point today where the fundamentals of what we have created together are
under attack.

Madame President
The Charter is our main reference point when we reflect on the most pressing
challenges of today. The following paragraph from the preamble stands out this
year: "We the peoples of the United Nations determined ... to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained". Today more
than ever, we are challenged in our determination to do just this. Today, we can
. no longer take it for granted that these conditions exist. The questioning of
international agreements and norms in the areas of trade, climate change,
disarmament, migration, human rights has one common thread: It undermines
not just the contents of those agreements. It is an attack on the rules-based
order as such. It runs contrary to the pledge that we are all committed to under
the UN Charter: respect for obligations under international law.

Madame President
Overwhelming support for the international rules based order has been
expressed in the course of this debate. This gives us hope and inspiration to
tackle the challenges we are facing. To be clear: We need to work harder to
make the UN fit for purpose. Most importantly, we still have a Security Council
that is least functional when it is most needed. While addressing our
weaknesses we must also make better use of our strengths, in particular the

5

power of this Assembly. It has the legal and political authority to build
institutions and set policies that are game changers.

Madame President
One such institution is the accountability mechanism for Syria. We were proud
to lead the way to the creation of the 111M two years ago. Born out of the
frustration over the deadlock in the Security Council, it has quickly become a
symbol of what this Assembly can achieve - and a beacon of hope for Syria. At
this critical moment in the Syrian conflict, our resolve to ensure accountability
for the crimes committed will shape the future of the country.

A very different situation confronts us with a similar massive accountability
challenge: The atrocities committed against the Rohingya population by the
authorities in Myanmar are shocking to all of us. There can be no voluntary
return of the hundreds of thousands forcibly displaced into Bangladesh unless
we ensure a credible accountability process. We now have a direct path to
justice, because the International Criminal Court has ruled that it can exercise
jurisdiction over the crime of forced deportation. This creates a new and
expeditious policy option for the 123 States among us which have joined the
Rome Statute: We can come together and refer the situation in Cox's Bazaar to
the ICC. I hope that this conversation will take place here in New York over the
next few weeks.

Madame President

6

From Syria to Myanmar to Venezuela, the International Criminal Court is at the
center of the effort to fight impunity. Its creation 20 years ago was perhaps the
most important advance in the recent history of international law. It fulfilled a
vision that had eluded us for a century. And today, it is an institution that is
imperfect --'" but more importantly: It is indispensable. It is telling that at a time
of a generic questioning of a rules-based order, the ICC finds itself under
particular attack, from different sides. More than ever, we need this Court. And
more than ever, we must be ready to stand up for it.

Madame President
The issue of modern slavery and human trafficking is one that is particularly
disturbing to the Liechtenstein Government. Seventy years ago, in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, we agreed that IINo one shall be held in slavery or
. servitude". Today, over 40 million people, predominantly women and girls, live
in these conditions. This is unacceptable. We have joined forces with our
partners from Australia and from UNU and created the Financial Sector
Commission (FSC). Its task is to design a response for actors in the financial
sector to help eliminate modern slavery and to ensure that perpetrators are
brought to justice. I am proud to serve-as the Co-Convenor of this Commission,
together with Nobel Peace Laureate Muhammad Yunus. We are under no
illusion about the magnitude of the task. But we are encouraged that the 2030
Agenda has created such a strong impetus to finally eliminate slavery. We stand
ready to take this opportunity, together with all of you.

Thank you.
7

