STATEMENT BY
YAB PRIME MINISTER OF MALAYSIA
TUN DR MAHATHIR BIN MOHAMAD
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73RD SESSION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY (UNGA)
28 SEPTEMBER 2018, NEW YORK
****************************************************
Madam President,
1. I would like to join others in congratulating you on your election as the
President of the Seventy-Third (73rd) Session of the United Nations
General Assembly (UNGA).
2. I am confident with your wisdom and vast experience; this session
will achieve the objectives of the theme for this session. I assure you
of Malaysia‟s fullest support and cooperation towards achieving these
noble goals.
3. Allow me to also pay tribute to your predecessor, His Excellency
Miroslav Lajcak, for his dedication and stewardship in successfully
completing the work of the 72nd Session of the General Assembly.
4. I commend the Secretary-General and the United Nations staff for
their tireless efforts in steering and managing UN activities globally.
5. In particular, I pay tribute to the late Kofi Annan, the seventh
Secretary-General of the UN from 1997 – 2006, who sadly passed
away in August this year. Malaysia had a positively strong and active
engagement with the UN during his tenure.
1

Madam President,
6. The theme of this 73rd Session of General Assembly, “Making the
United Nations Relevant to All People: Global Leadership and Shared
Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies”
remains true to the aspiration of our founding fathers. The theme is
most relevant and timely. It is especially pertinent in the context of the
new Malaysia. The new Government of Malaysia, recently
empowered with a strong mandate from its people, is committed to
ensure that every Malaysian has an equitable share in the prosperity
and wealth of the nation.
7. A new Malaysia emerged after the 14th General Election in May this
year. Malaysians decided to change their government, which had
been in power for 61 years, i.e., since independence. We did this
because the immediate past Government indulged in the politics of
hatred, of racial and religious bigotry, as well as widespread
corruption. The process of change was achieved democratically,
without violence or loss of lives.
8. Malaysians want a new Malaysia that upholds the principles of
fairness, good governance, integrity and the rule of law. They want a
Malaysia that is a friend to all and enemy of none. A Malaysia that
remains neutral and non-aligned. A Malaysia that detests and abhors
wars and violence. They also want a Malaysia that will speak its
mind on what is right and wrong, without fear or favour. A new
Malaysia that believes in co-operation based on mutual respect, for
mutual gain. The new Malaysia that offers a partnership based on our
philosophy of „prosper-thy-neighbour‟. We believe in the goodness of
cooperation, that a prosperous and stable neighbour would contribute
to our own prosperity and stability.
9. The new Malaysia will firmly espouse the principles promoted by the
UN in our international engagements. These include the principles of
truth, human rights, the rule of law, justice, fairness, responsibility
2

and accountability, as well as sustainability. It is within this context
that the new government of Malaysia has pledged to ratify all
remaining core UN instruments related to the protection of human
rights. It will not be easy for us because Malaysia is multi-ethnic,
multireligious, multicultural and multilingual. We will accord space
and time for all to deliberate and to decide freely based on
democracy.
Madam President,

10. When I last spoke here in 2003, I lamented how the world had lost its
way. I bemoaned the fact that small countries continued to be at the
mercy of the powerful. I argued the need for the developing world to
push for reform, to enhance capacity building and diversify the
economy. We need to maintain control of our destiny.
11. But today, 15 years later the world has not changed much. If at all the
world is far worse than 15 years ago. Today the world is in a state of
turmoil economically, socially and politically.
12. There is a trade war going on between the two most powerful
economies. And the rest of the world feel the pain.
13. Socially new values undermine the stability of nations and their
people. Freedom has led to the negation of the concept of marriage
and families, of moral codes, of respect etc.
14. But the worse turmoil is in the political arena. We are seeing acts of
terror everywhere. People are tying bombs to their bodies and
blowing themselves up in crowded places. Trucks are driven into
holiday crowds. Wars are fought and people beheaded with short
knives. Acts of brutality are broadcast to the world live. Masses of
people risk their lives to migrate only to be denied asylum, sleeping in
the open and freezing to death. Thousands starve and tens of
thousands die in epidemics of cholera.

3

15. No one, no country is safe. Security checks inconvenience travellers.
No liquids on planes. The slightest suspicion leads to detention and
unpleasant questioning.
16. To fight the “terrorists” all kinds of security measures, all kinds of
gadgets and equipment are deployed. Big brother is watching. But
the acts of terror continues.
17. Malaysia fought the bandits and terrorists at independence and
defeated them. We did use the military. But alongside and more
importantly we campaigned to win the hearts of minds of these
people.
18. This present war against the terrorist will not end until the root causes
are found and removed and hearts and minds are won.
19. What are the root causes? In 1948, Palestinian land was seized to
form the state of Israel. The Palestinians were massacred and forced
to leave their land. Their houses and farms were seized.
20. They tried to fight a conventional war with help from sympathetic
neighbours. The friends of Israel ensured this attempt failed. More
Palestinian land was seized. And Israeli settlements were built on
more and more Palestinian land and the Palestinians are denied
access to these settlements built on their land.
21. The Palestinians initially tried to fight with catapults and stones. They
were shot with live bullets and arrested. Thousands are incarcerated.
22. Frustrated and angry, unable to fight a conventional war, the
Palestinians resort to what we call terrorism.
23. The world does not care even when Israel breaks international laws,
seizing ships carrying medicine, food and building materials in
international waters. The Palestinians fired ineffective rockets which
hurt no one. Massive retaliations were mounted by Israel, rocketing

4

and bombing hospitals, schools and other buildings, killing innocent
civilians including school children and hospital patients. And more.
24. The world rewards Israel, deliberately provoking Palestine by
recognising Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.
25. It is the anger and frustration of the Palestinians and their
sympathisers that cause them to resort to what we call terrorism. But
it is important to acknowledge that any act which terrify people also
constitute terrorism. And states dropping bombs or launching rockets
which maim and kill innocent people also terrify people. These are
also acts of terrorism.
26. Malaysia hates terrorism. We will fight them. But we believe that the
only way to fight terrorism is to remove the cause. Let the
Palestinians return to reclaim their land. Let there be a state of
Palestine. Let there be justice and the rule of law. Warring against
them will not stop terrorism. Nor will out-terrorising them succeed.
27. We need to remind ourselves that the United Nations Organisation,
like the League of Nations before, was conceived for the noble
purpose of ending wars between nations.
28. Wars are about killing people. Modern wars are about mass killings
and total destruction countrywide. Civilised nations claim they abhor
killing for any reason. When a man kills, he commits the crime of
murder. And the punishment for murder may be death.
29. But wars, we all know encourage and legitimise killing. Indeed the
killings are regarded as noble, and the killers are hailed as heroes.
They get medals stuck to their chest and statues erected in their
honour, have their names mentioned in history books.
30. There is something wrong with our way of thinking, with our value
system. Kill one man, it is murder, kill a million and you become a
hero. And so we still believe that conflict between nations can be
resolved with war.
5

31. And because we still do, we must prepare for war. The old adage
says “to have peace, prepare for war”. And we are forever preparing
for war, inventing more and more destructive weapons. We now have
nuclear bombs, capable of destroying whole cities. But now we know
that the radiation emanating from the explosion will affect even the
country using the bomb. A nuclear war would destroy the world.

32. This fear has caused the countries of Europe and North America to
maintain peace for over 70 years. But that is not for other countries.
Wars in these other countries can help live test the new weapons
being invented.

33. And so they sell them to warring countries. We see their arms in wars
fought between smaller countries. These are not world wars but they
are no less destructive. Hundreds of thousands of people have been
killed, whole countries devastated and nations bankrupted because
of these fantastic new weapons.
34. But these wars give handsome dividends to the arms manufacturers
and traders. The arms business is now the biggest business in the
world. They profit shamelessly from the deaths and destructions they
cause. Indeed, so-called peace-loving countries often promote this
shameful business.
35. Today‟s weapons cost millions. Fighter jets cost about 100 million
dollars. And maintaining them cost tens of millions. But the poor
countries are persuaded to buy them even if they cannot afford. They
are told their neighbours or their enemies have them. It is imperative
that they too have them.
36. So, while their people starve and suffer from all kinds of deprivations,
a huge percentage of their budget is allocated to the purchase of

6

arms. That their buyers may never have to use them bothers the
purveyors not at all.
Madam President,
37. In Myanmar, Muslims in Rakhine state are being murdered, their
homes torched and a million refugees had been forced to flee, to
drown in the high seas, to live in makeshift huts, without water or
food, without the most primitive sanitation. Yet the authorities of
Myanmar including a Nobel Peace Laureate deny that this is
happening. I believe in non-interference in the internal affairs of
nations. But does the world watch massacres being carried out and
do nothing? Nations are independent. But does this mean they have
a right to massacre their own people, because they are independent?

Madam President,
TRADE
38. On the other hand, in terms of trade, nations are no longer
independent. Free trade means no protection by small countries of
their infant industries. They must abandon tariff restrictions and open
their countries to invasion by products of the rich and the powerful.
Yet the simple products of the poor are subjected to clever barriers
so that they cannot penetrate the market of the rich. Malaysian palm
oil is labelled as dangerous to health and the estates are destroying
the habitat of animals. Food products of the rich declare that they are
palm oil free. Now palm diesel are condemned because they are
decimating virgin jungles. These caring people forget that their
boycott is depriving hundreds of thousands of people from jobs and a
decent life.
39. We in Malaysia care for the environment. Some 48% of our country
remains virgin jungle. Can our detractors claim the same for their own
countries?

7

Madam President,
40. Malaysia is committed to sustainable development. We have taken
steps, for example in improving production methods to ensure that
our palm oil production is sustainable. By December 2019, the
Malaysian Sustainable Palm Oil (MSPO) standard will become
mandatory. This will ensure that every drop of palm oil produced in
Malaysia will be certified sustainable by 2020.

Madam President,
41. All around the world, we observe a dangerous trend to inward-looking
nationalism, of governments pandering to populism, retreating from
international collaborations and shutting their borders to free
movements of people, goods and services even as they talk of a
borderless world, of free trade. While globalisation has indeed
brought us some benefits, the impacts have proven to be threatening
to the independence of small nations. We cannot even talk or move
around without having our voices and movement recorded and often
used against us. Data on everyone is captured and traded by
powerful nations and their corporations.
42. Malaysia lauds the UN in its endeavours to end poverty, protect our
planet and try to ensure everyone enjoys peace and prosperity. But I
would like to refer to the need for reform in the organisation. Five
countries on the basis of their victories 70 over years ago cannot
claim to have a right to hold the world to ransom forever. They cannot
take the moral high ground, preaching democracy and regime
change in the countries of the world when they deny democracy in
this organisation.
43. I had suggested that the veto should not be by just one permanent
member but by at least two powers backed by three non-permanent
members of the Security Council. The General Assembly should then
back the decision with a simple majority. I will not say more.
8

44. I must admit that the world without the UN would be disastrous. We
need the UN, we need to sustain it with sufficient funds. No one
should threaten it with financial deprivation.

Madam President
45. After 15 years and at 93, I return to this podium with the heavy task of
bringing the voice and hope of the new Malaysia to the world stage.
The people of Malaysia, proud of their recent democratic
achievement, have high hopes that around the world – we will see
peace, progress and prosperity. In this we look toward the UN to hear
our pleas.
I thank you, Madam President.

9

