REPUBLIC OF MALTA
PERMANENT MISSION
OF THE

REPUBLIC OF MALTA

Statement by

TO THE

UNITED NATIONS

the Honourable Dr. Joseph Muscat

Prime Minister of the Republic of Malta

73'"^ Session of the
United Nations General Assembly

United Nations
New York

27^'^ September 2018
249 East 35th Street
New York, N.V. 10016

Phone: (212) 725-2345
Fax: (212) 779-7097
Email: malta-un.newyork@gov.mt

(Check against delivery)

Mr President,

Secretary-General,
Excellencies,

This summer we lost a great man: Kofi Annan. He stood for how we cannot achieve
the United Nations' goals without being united in our approach. Which is why I am
here addressing you today: because I believe that global problems require global
solutions. Advocating a global approach does not mean loving your country less than
others. It means that working together makes it less likely that a 'might is right'
doctrine will prevail. And better solutions can be found together, rather than alone.
To find solutions we must remain committed to communicate and understand one

another. Because, whatever challenges we need to address, and however different
each nation's views and perspectives are, we have a better chance at solving them
as a united force, rather than divided, or on our own.

Malta being a member of both the European Union and the Commonwealth knows
only too well how no single nation, however big or small, cannot tackle global
phenomena alone.

The trend of nations drifting towards reactions confined to their own borders is of
concern. Some are worryingly looking at solving global issues with local solutions
which, as many of you recognise, can at best give the illusion of working for a limited
period of time, and at worst lead to almost immediate implosion.

Of course, we must respect the sovereignty of all nations, and we have no right to
stand before you to judge. But those who are closing themselves off to debate are
falsely believing they will escape certain issues. We are seeing divisions not just
amongst global leaders and nations, but within our own societies, neighbourhoods,
and even families. Local solutions breed global problems which can manifest
themselves with devastating results.

From the use of plastic products which are polluting our seas to the point they are
killing our sea life.
To mass migration and the effect of displacement on both migrants and host
societies, where there are vulnerable people on both sides.
I mention these examples because both hit us particularly hard in Malta and in the
Mediterranean. The latter is visible to all. We are in the centre of the Mediterranean,

in the middle of the route between North Africa, Libya and mainland Europe. The
centre of a journey, thousands of persons have undertaken over past years.
We have been grappling with all the complexities that this poses for years - much
longer than it has been recognised as a priority by the international community, and
dominating media headlines in Europe and beyond.

Although crossings through the Central Mediterranean have decreased in the past
year, the concerns of our populations have risen. And many feel the international
community has failed in providing solutions to these concerns. This has given rise to
movements that preach a single, simplistic solution to a complex phenomenon.
What can surely be stopped if we have a unified approach, are the criminal gangs
profiting from smuggling human beings. With a global strategy to deliver incisive
blows to migrant smugglers, we can disrupt their online recruitment efforts, their
payment methods, as well as their continued supply of sea vessels: most
importantly, we can, together, stop these people profiting from a practise that often
results In the death of innocent people.

Malta is a small state which registers one of the highest economic growth in Europe
and in the world, but also ranks among the highest worldwide in terms of the number
of asylum applications per capita. Despite this, Malta's humanitarian response
continues to fully adhere to its international commitments. This is also true for

Malta's policy, which has been consistent and clear. And we expect others, not only
States but also non-State actors involved, to also abide by international rules.
In recent weeks - because of the actions of a few who did not abide by the relevant
conventions - Malta had to bring together like-minded nations with humanitarian
consciences to offer a place of safety to stranded migrants. Malta had no legal
obligation to do so, but in the spirit of unified solutions it did. And it proved that when
solidarityworks, complex issues can often have simple solutions.

Although I am under no illusion and know this was just a temporary respite to a much
bigger problem, actions like these can provide the foundations for a longer-term
solution if all European Union member states come together. A solution that could
look like a Bretton Woods-styled institutional arrangement to address and manage
migration, with international support.

The Global Compact on Migration, which aims to establish a new global migration
governance architecture on the principle of shared international responsibilities and
solidarity, is a welcome move in the right direction. But it is a milestone, not the end
of the road. We must now walk the talk by engaging in operational action.
Mr President,

Narratives that use inflated or false facts, and thrive on the fear of a nation being
open have led to painful outcomes in history. Not just the obvious, but also
international relationship dynamics, which overflows into other issues with
devastating results. The current increase in nationalism and tighter borders threatens
to do just that, with democratic decisions potentially being hampered, feeding
extremism of all kinds.

But let us take faith in knowing that in the 73 years of the UN's existence, the going
has always been tough. In fact, those who stood and spoke where I am today have
faced much worse crises from wars, famines, injustice and killer diseases. But
through unified approaches solutions were sought and nations survived. And each

time we came together, we emerged stronger as an institution. We currently live in a
world with less wars and more dialogue and cooperation than ever before.

But our work is not done. And it probably never will be. Although less people live in
extreme poverty, it has not been eradicated. We have found solutions to many lifethreatening diseases, yet cures are still needed for others. Injustice remains, and
climate change could be the biggest threat to life in history. As we solve one issue,
another will replace it. The important thing is we continue striving and working
towards the greater good. But we can only do this together.

A way foHA/ard that Malta advocates is the harnessing of new technologies, which
pose endless possibilities. We are currently in exciting technological times: with the
lightening pace of current technological advance, each incredible piece of new
innovation could hold a new solution to a problem we may have been persisting with
for decades, from advanced robotics and artificial intelligence, to 3D printing and the
Internet of Things.
Yes, there are challenges in this fast and obvious transition to the digital economy.
These challenges have to do with the very nature of concepts that we have believed
would stay with us forever. One of them is the nature of work, how we envisage it,
how we compensate it, how we maximise its efficiency and how the state creates
new safety nets. It is a conversation that has just started globally, but one that will
shape public debate during our lifetime.
We can take the antagonistic view that technological progress is bad for us, that it
will lead to new types of poverty, that it will outstrip people of their right, or even take
decisions out of their hands. While this might sound appealing as a short term
strategy for some politicians, and even sensible to well meaning people who are
afraid progress will cost them their job, it would be as myopic as those advocating for
horsecarts not to be replaced by motor vehicles.
Be it for immigration or technology solutions do not come from closing doors. The
digital economy needs to be seen as an opportunity, without nevertheless thinking
that we can best harness its opportunities without evolving the current social
contracts in place.
Those who will be able to pair the digital economy with a new state, the digital state,
will be best poised to have a futureproof society where change does not galvanise
extremes, but provides for other decades of sensible, mainstream policymaking and
prosperity.

Then there are the other big questions that the dawn of this digital age will need to
see answered. Can we solve stalemate diplomatic negotiations by applying
algorithms that can avoid war? Can we disarm terrorists using the latest technology?
Is it possible to know immediately which remote parts of our planet need
international humanitarian assistance assistance? Could we create new organs for
people so no one dies on a donor list? Can we live the day when humanity can be
told that there is a cure to all cancers?

Only time will tell. But it is the accessibility to advanced technologies that will lead to
solutions. Hopefully for the whole world.

I passionately believe technology revolutionises and improves systems.
Which is why, in Malta, we have launched ourselves as the Blockchain Island by
being the first jurisdiction to regularise a new technology that previously existed in a
legal vacuum. Blockchain makes cryptocurrencies, the inevitable future of money,
more transparent since it helps filter good business from bad business. But these

Distributed Ledger Technologies can do much more. It can provide new solutions to
healthcare systems where patients have real ownership of their medical records.
Emissions trading systems can be taken to the next level. We can help verify that
humanitarian assistance is reaching its intended destination. We can make sure that
nobody is deprived of their legitimate property because of compromised data.
Corporations will be able to become more accountable to their shareholders. States

will need to move from hoarding information on citizens to regulating an environment
where citizens trust the handling of their data.

These are just few ways how we can counter regressive and reactionary politics.
This forum shows that we stand to gain through dialogue and cooperation which will
always triumph over division, cynicism, and self-absorption.
Because, in unity we can have hope.

