mSl

Office of the President
REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS

H.E. Ms. HHda Heine

President of the Republic of the Marshall Islands^
73^ Session of the United Nations Generaf Assemb^
General Debate

New York 25 September 2018

check against delivery

Madame President, Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies,

I have the honor to bring you the warm greetings of Yokwe on behalf of the Republic of the
Marshal! i^ands.

In its best moments, the United' Nations has served' as a cornmon plhtform for every nation - but

especially for the mostvulnerable. At present —nations are pullmg in new directions, stretching
the threads which hold us all together, and pushing the world to the edge.

It is imperative that the member states of the United Nations continue to unite behind an
iBteiaMtEksaal snules^based oxder \\diich does not ovedook die voices

die most vuhierable

peoples. As a former Umted Nations Stral^c Trusteeship, the Marshall IslaxKls can speakwith
aaithoiity fiom our own histoay - ofdie times vdaeane the blmit wJQ ofHhe most powerM ravaged
our shores, and the moments where the common concern of humanity failed us, as well as those
times Msdiere it ensured—diat our Mardhallese voices mattered.

We welcome engagement with the world's largest powers ~ but they must have our best island
interests at heart.

Madame President,

Human rights stands as a challenging universal ideal - which all must aspire to - and i^hold.
The UN Human Rights Gouncil has tremendous potential to lend transparency, dialogic and

progress. While we must take more time to carefully connect giob^ norms and national

implementation —because one size never fits all - the United Nations must never hesitate to
stand
to actors who would seek to evade
everyone else mi^t see as common decency.
And this is not an abstract statement - ffom our own histoiy, and our contemporary challeitges,

4he MaisMUaslaads imows^the rhie co^equences wMoh anse when Abe antemadona^ comaninhy
might look the other way because of poiitical eiqjediency. Far more polMcal will is needed to

ensure no one as tiuiy left hdnnd. Wh^verftie shoztconrings ofthe UN Human Ri^ts Councii,
it is on the shoulders of member states to address - we have to fix it ourselves. And we will not

stand by in silence.

Tel: (692) 625-3445/2233 j Fax: (692) 625-4021 i Website: nni-op.net

For these reasons, the Republic of the Marshall Islands has put forward ifs candidacy for the Human
Rivals Council in the term 21)20 to 2022,
Real comnitment is in actiotts in words. As an example - we have

only enaoted ^sahiity

ri'^ts le^slahoB 'to meet our treaty oMigatiions, hut we curFently have a hill before parliament wldeh
amends over 100 existing statutes to ensure we mainstream ripits across all sectors. And we are
moving towards a similar undertaking on gender. <5ur partners, including IMESCAiP, have already
been key sources of assistance, but it is our political will which can make this a reality. Humanrights
is not just treaty signatures, it is a visible step-change in our local communities.
Madame President,

Small nations can have a unique role within the mufflateraF system. We woufd not have fee UN Law
of the Sea, or the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, and a great many ofeer ontcomes but for the political will of SIDS. We are a quarterof this body'smembership.
But —does the UN system invest equally in us? We will struggle to t^kle the SDGs unless there is
ua^Lt atisoiioa to both our own data capacityandit's use by fee ii^emational system. Mmxy of our
cote sodal development isidicatois
stagnant - and while we are trying to change dl of feis, we

I strongly suj^it fee Seaetary-^seiserars Mfe^ve

UN sysftem refcMrm - to do more, and do it

better, with the resources at hand. Our present UN Resident Coordinator is not a reside at all, and
facesan impossible taskto ejBfectively serve 10 remotenations at once. I lookforward to the upcoming

review ofthe UN's multi-co^mtry of^es, m^idated inresolu^oa 1Q£Z1% andu%e innovate solnlionis^
And this year is a key opportunity for the UN system to make the SAMOA Pathw^ fbr SIDS a real
opportunity for system cbasige.
Madame President,

Decades ago, small island developing states warned the world of the risks of climate chmige —and
^se w^e oaioe feeordSealHacats. Now wemust ^s^d time on advocacy - time vfeidi we
do

nothave. The Pans Agreement stands strong as a powerMand united legd commifenent 6om all- the
largesft'-a®d
^ —'ft©
CBsaro atase cKf no more ten 1.5
degrees Celsius.

I strongly affirm the 2019 Secretary-General's Climate Summit. At the highest levels, this is an urgent
opportunity for leaders to reshape headlines, and put the Paris Agreement into motion by responding to
the urgentneed for enh^mced action and ambition at true scale.
This is not just a moral promise - but an economic reality, as energy markets ahready p)int the way
towards better choices. But I am not asking of others what we will not do at home, and this week I
have announced the Marshall Islands is tmnsitiomng to a net zero emissions target by 2050.
We are already taking action to not only meet this goal, but also in increase our near-term ambition, as
well as to accelerate adaptation efforts.

in imsiii^our anfetfion, I know we wiii not be sdone. T^e PacificIslandForumLeaders in last month's
Boe Declaration -havedeclared clima'te change as viie

-gneartest seomity feroat to our region. This

political
mus^ ext^iui to mgemand pnoridzed ^^stance to atollnations IBte fee Marshall Ishmds —
vfeose very survival is at risk - to help adapt to climate-driven threats we already face, and to avoid a
future tipping point only a decade or two away. Much more political effort is needed on the scale and

taigeting of climate finance - so good intentions from partners can make a visible impact in local
communijfies.

As ^ low^ying atoll islfflMl ®ation —little more tlmi one met^ a.lw>ve sea-lewl - tiie feuae of &e
MarSMl Islands hangs in -the balance. But it is not just us, even if as an atoil nation we are the most
vulnerable - we are joined not only by other small island developing states, but many other countries
who face serious challenges posed by climate impacts.

As President of the Climate Vulnerable Forum, I call on every leader in the world to join me this
November 22°^ in an online viirtual summit to ensuare that no one - and no country - is left beMsid.

For the Marshall Isl^jds, we emerged from the colonial period. World War Two and the unpaGts of
nuclear testing conducted more than 6 decades ago. During the adoption of our C^mstitution m 1979
and becoming a UN member state in 1991, we ware focused entirely on building a nation to leave
behind for our children. Only 27 years later, now facing the consequences of climate change - we are

nowasking ourselves - what legacy will we leave as a nation forour grandchildren to inherit?
Madame Presidmt,

Hie UN Oceans Summit last year has set the sla^e to ensuxe tSaat oceans - tww) tiurds of the world's
surface - must no longerbe an isolated silo, but will be an integral part of sustainable development and
global commitment TheMarshall Islands is more than 99 percent ocean.
It is our culture, our primary economic pathw^, and our identity. The world must move far beyond
words, and into actions, because we all' must be gravely alarmed at what has too offen become a
downward spiral.

Earlier this year, the eight Pacific leaders of the Parties to the Nauaru Agreement met in the Marshall
Islands, the first such leaders meeting since 2010. In the intervening years, we have rewrote the

playbook ofglobal tuna markets - working to ensure this will not only be an economic lifeline for our
ifotore gen^ions, but remain a vduable source of global food security and the worid's largest
sustainablepurse seine.tunafi^eiy

MitMs iregard, I welcome the outreach and engagement ofG7 leaders to focus onoceans and fisheries,
under foe leadersMp of Canada. Intematioiral developiment imnoe souroes need toimprove delivery of
taigeted direct support. Marine plastic pollution is crippling gloMI waters, and illegal fishing in the
Pacific is more than a violation of law and treaty - but a major regional security issue.

Nextweek, the Marshall Islands will host the launching of a regional initiative for an lUU Free Pacific,
to eradicate illegal fishirx^ fixraa. ourTfegtcn. Eifo^ced effoifts on illegal fishing are needed by Regonal
Fisheries Management Oiganizatians^ and we should not be afraid to name and shame the worst
offenders.

Madame President,

As the first woman head of state or government in the independentPacific islands region, it is vital that
foe UN accelerate efforts to ensiHe that aff women - and especi?glyour youngest generations— must see

that they have a rightful role at all levels ofdecision-making, includmg the highest levels ofpofiiical
leadership and economic develoiwnent. As women - we are, afler all - half of the world's population.

and we are not yet fully reflected in the ranks of global leaders.
Madiame President,

For too many years, multilateral discussions to end nuclear weapons have gone in ckeles. I strongly
welcome progress whenever it is Ifeun^l - and I remain cautiously optimistic of efforts towar^fe a safe
and secure Korean peninsula - with complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization. But until
that is achieved, the Marshall Islands strongly affirms its conunitment to the full implementation of the
UN Securi^ €oTmcil%-SEmcti©BS, iiKjlitai^^ m the aiaaddme sector.
Threats ofatnu^pheric testing in die Pacific ocean are of obvious concern to me and my fellow Pacific
islaiid leaders - and for every MarshaHese ciitazen, ifehe impacts naadear testing are not just aMstorical
legacy, but a contemporary reality. These were the only instances where the UN ever explicitly
authorized the testing of nuclear weapons, and the consequences are horrific. The 67 nuclear weapons

tests conducted between 1946 and 1958,haveproduced impacts through generations.
These took place during our status as a Unhed Natkms Strategic Trust Tenitory, mcluding testii^
authorized by UN Trusteeship resolutums 1082 and 1493. TMs is a burden wMeb no other nation cot

people ^ould ever bear. This is not only a lesson whichthe worldmust learn, but a situation where the
United Nations has already offered its assistance.

My government has recently established the national nuclear commission to work carefully with
affected local commiiinifies, and also re^caial and istesmafionsfl agencies, ^to better elaborate our

complex issues, and to develop a strategy for nuclear justice. It is vital that all possible efforts are
accdCTatcd to Mj) us address4!he human
and the envnomnentofom: affected|>eof^e.
Madame President,

The Security Council - and the United Nations as a whole - must adapt and change - we are no longer
the world of seven decades ago.

It is important to realize UN Security Councir reform, and to launch text-based negotiatkHis towards
Security Council reform duringthis sessionof the General Assembly.
Madame President,

Decolonization and human rights are both important issues in the Pacific islands region. I strongly
affirm the posidcm of the Pacific Island Vamm Leadea*s in recagniang to construdive engagement by
Forum countries with ludonesia with respect to -eleciioias and human rights in West Papua, and the
commitmeBil to continue dMogue in an open and constnictive manner.
Madame President,

The Republic of the Marshall Islands supports the recognition of Taiwan's meaningful participation
within the UN system, includingpFOgi?ams and agencies, such asICACX the WHO and UNFCCC.

The people of Taiwan deserve eqpaltreaterent, and the UN shouldlesofvethe seriousissue ofTaiwan*s
23 million people being excludted from the UN' system - an issue we believe is not addressed in UN
General Assembly Resolution 2758. Taiwan has been implementing the SDGs and has released a

voluntary national review. It has the capacityto contribute to a wide range of UN programs relevantto
global progress, diseases like tuberculosis know no boundaries, and Taiwan has brought it's policy
framework in line wi^ global efforts. Taiwan has served as a primary partner for my own nation in
adtfressing Non Communicable Diseases, which me now at cri^ levels. Bloekmg Taiwan's
partici^atibndoes not benefitglobal human welfare.
Madame President,

In closing, it is imperative that- as the trulyUnited Nations - we all taketo heart the national motto of
the Rfijmblic of the Marshall Islands - JepHpilin ke l^ukaan - which tr^lates as "accomplishment

throu^ joint effort."

we do as l^ders at iJite UN - and <bey/md - is a legacy firr the next

.'gen^atHHi, and those who fi»lk>w.
Thank you and kommol tata.

