73rd Session of the United Nations
General Assembly
New York
********************

Intervention
By Hon Pravind Kumar Jugnauth
Prime Minister
OF THE REPUBLIC OF MAURITIUS

****************

Friday 28 September 2018

Madam President,
Distinguished delegates,
Let me join other Leaders to pay a special tribute to late Kofi Annan, former SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. The legacy left by this great son of Africa will remain
forever carved in the history of the United Nations.
Madam President,
I warmly congratulate you on your election as the President of the 73rd Session of the
General Assembly and wish to reassure you of our full support in your work.
I also thank Mr Miroslav Lajcak for his dedicated and able leadership; relentless
commitment to multilateralism and continued engagement with member States during
his presidency.
Madam President,
2018 is a special year for Mauritius.
It marks the fiftieth Anniversary of our Independence. We also celebrate, with immense
pride and honour, fifty years of membership to this august body.

The theme for this session, Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global
Leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies , is both apt and timely.

Madam President,
We are living in troubled times, marked by uncertainties and complex threats to peace,
stability and sustainability of our planet.
Increased international tensions, intractable conflicts, expanding pockets of poverty
throughout the world, growing inequalities, the deterioration of the oceans, climate
change, violent extremism and terrorism, nationalism, cyber threats, escalading
militarization, and forced migration are only some of the perils that endanger global
peace and security.

These challenges cannot be overcome without greater cooperation, global leadership
and shared responsibilities.
We wholeheartedly welcome the reform process to make the United Nations fit for
purpose, closer and in synchronization with the people that it serves and better

Page 2 of 8

equipped to service the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development so that no one, irrespective of race and gender, is left behind.
Madam President,
My Government remains fully committed to the 2030 Agenda. In this regard, Mauritius
will present its voluntary national review at the 2019 High Level Political Forum next
July.
Madam President,
The SAMOA Pathway remains a valid roadmap for us to measure how much progress
has been achieved in addressing the challenges and difficulties faced by SIDS,
including climate change.
We welcome the holding of the mid-term review of the SAMOA Pathway next
September and call on all stakeholders to participate at the highest level in order to
accompany SIDS in strengthening their resilience.
The stark effects of climate change are being felt all around the world. As we have
seen in California, the Carolinas, the Philippines, China, Europe and elsewhere, the
frequency of extreme weather events demonstrates that the impacts of climate change
can affect every country on every continent.

Hurricanes, floods, droughts, and wildfires are becoming deadlier, and weather patterns
more severe. These disasters are sounding the alarm.

Without a renewed global commitment to undertake ambitious efforts to combat climate
change and adapt to its effects we will fail to meet the targets of the Paris Agreement,
and endanger our planet as well as our own survival.

Madam President,
We cannot dissociate climate from our oceans. Our planet s future also depends on our
ability to further protect the ocean and increase its ability to act as a buffer against
climate change. We need global leadership and enhanced multilateral cooperation to
safeguard the ocean and its role as the natural weather regulator of our planet.

Madam President,
As a large ocean State, respectful of the rule of law and international law, Mauritius has
taken the lead in the Western Indian Ocean region to combat piracy and other
transnational organized crimes, and keep its territory and surrounding areas safe.

Page 3 of 8

As Chair of the Indian Ocean Commission, Mauritius co-hosted with the Indian Ocean
Commission a Ministerial conference on Maritime Security in April 2018, to coordinate
actions to fight transnational organised crimes, such as drug trafficking, piracy and
human trafficking.
In doing so, we have consolidated our engagement with the UN system, in particular,

the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs (UNDPA) with which we have recently signed an MoU to
assist the Indian Ocean region to fight these security threats and challenges.
Madam President,
We are equally concerned with the situation in the Middle East where the scourge of
violence and war continues to claim innocent lives.
Peace in that region would remain elusive as long as the international community does
not live up to its legal and moral responsibilities to uphold international law.
Mauritius therefore reiterates its call for renewed and genuine international efforts for
negotiations towards an early realization of the two-state solution, with an independent
and viable Palestine, existing side by side and at peace with the State of Israel. While
we wait for this to happen, it is extremely important that the sufferings of the people,
especially women and children, are alleviated through renewed and increased
international support.
Madam President,
Despite all current efforts, terrorism still remains a painful reality claiming numerous
lives daily and threatening world peace and development.
It is urgent to build consensus on global counter terrorism efforts and reinforce
multilateral cooperation in fighting this scourge. Indeed, we need to pay attention to
why individuals are attracted to violent extremist groups. We are convinced that the
creation of open, equitable, inclusive and pluralist societies, based on the full respect of
human rights and with education and economic opportunities for all, represents the
most effective way to end violent extremism.
Madam President,
In the same vein, we need to reinforce global non-proliferation regimes. The continued
existence of nuclear arsenals and the threat of a nuclear disaster represents a major
impediment to the maintenance of peace and security.

Page 4 of 8

We need to also remain vigilant to the cyberthreats which endanger our national
security.

As highlighted in the new Disarmament Agenda by the UN Secretary-General in May
2018, we need to create secure space, land, sea, spatial, and cyber zones alike. We

need to do whatever is necessary to make our planet a safe place for all.
Madam President,
Unregulated drug consumption and trafficking if unchecked has the potential of
destroying the future of our youth. We are but too well aware how drugs undermine
sustainable human development and the stability of countries and whole regions.
My Government remains determined to fight drug trafficking. In that regard, the
Commission of Inquiry on Drugs set up to enquire on all aspects of drug trafficking in
Mauritius has recently submitted its findings. I have set up a Ministerial Committee to
look into the recommendations of the Commission which includes, inter alia, the
strengthening of existing institutional framework as well the review of relevant
legislations.
To address the evolving challenges of drugs, my country committed itself to the Global
Call to Action on the World Drug Problem. More than ever we need closer cooperation
to address this scourge.

Madam President,
We must be cautious not to undermine the multilateral system as this has served the
comity of nations well. The United Nations was created to bring States together. It also
established conditions under which justice and respect for law can be maintained and
strengthened.

Madam President,
Conscious of the responsibility of belonging to this Assembly, my country, at its
admission, made a pledge in 1968 to uphold the great ideals which are enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
We gave the assurance to bring our contribution, however modest it may be, to the
shaping of the destiny of a better world.
As a responsible member of this comity of nations, Mauritius has remained true to this
pledge.

Page 5 of 8

Today I reaffirm my country s continued commitment to the ideals and values of this
institution, the respect for international law and faith in international partnership to build
a safer and more prosperous world.

It is with this commitment that Mauritius subscribes to the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration and we look forward to its endorsement in Marrakech in
December.

Madam President,
In the same spirit of upholding the Charter of the United Nations and their commitment
to the international rule of law, in June 2017 Member States of the Group of African
States tabled a resolution to seek an advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius in 1965.

At the heart of this request for an advisory opinion is the issue of decolonization, a
matter of international public order under the Charter, a central element of the work of
the United Nations and General Assembly. The decolonization of Mauritius remains to
date incomplete in view of the unlawful excision of the Chagos Archipelago from
Mauritius prior to its accession to independence.
Madam President,
The hearings at the Court have been completed, and the judges will now deliberate on a
matter that has raised important issues on decolonization and human rights, particularly
the right to self-determination of the people of Mauritius and the plight suffered by
Mauritians of Chagossian origin who were forcibly removed from the Chagos
Archipelago.
The advisory opinion will also further clarify and strengthen the rule of law at the
international level, at a time when such strengthening is greatly needed.
I take this opportunity to express my Government’s appreciation to all the Member
States and the African Union which have actively participated in the written and oral
proceedings of the International Court of Justice relating to this matter.
Madam President,
The United Nations is and will always be at the center of all action for sustainable
development, peace and security. While we applaud the Secretary-General-led three¬

Page 6 of 8

pronged reform of the United Nations, considerable resources will be required to match
this ambition.
We appeal to all stake holders to generously support this reform by providing adequate
resources on a predictable basis.

We also appeal for a special consideration of Africa s needs and priorities in the
restructuring of the peace and security architecture.

Madam President,
We commend the efforts of the Secretary General to enhance the framework of
cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union- so vital for sustained
peace and development in the continent. Africa s growth is showing promising signs of
rebounding. Already several countries are undergoing positive transitions.
Elections in Africa during the last several years demonstrate that African countries have
strengthened their democracies while ensuring a peaceful transition of power.
We welcome the signature of a historical peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea ending two decades of tension which followed years of open conflict causing the
loss of thousands of lives.
This improved political climate, reconciliation efforts, and inclusive participation rights
herald a new age of governance that deser es to be supported by the international
community.

Madam President,
One aspect of the United Nation’s reform where we find progress wanting is the
collective aspiration for a strengthened and more legitimate Security Council reflecting
today’s reality.

We call, once again, for the reform of the UNSC and repeat our plea for the start of a
text-based negotiation.

We all agree that an equitable representation of Africa in the Security Council will not
only redress a gross historical injustice but render the Council more democratic and
representational.

We also support India’s legitimate aspiration for a permanent seat in an enlarged
Security Council and a non-permanent seat for SIDS.

Page 7 of 8

Madam President,
Three days ago, we celebrated the memory and legacy of one of Africa s most
illustrious leaders, Nelson Mandela.
We, as world leaders, would benefit from being inspired by the words and actions of
Mandela, especially when he says and I quote What counts in life is not the mere fact
that we have lived. It is what difference we have made to the lives of others that will
determine the significance of the life we lead unquote. Together we can make that
difference.

Thank you.

Page 8 of 8

