Perm nent Mission of the Federated States of Micronesia to the UN

300 East 42 Street, Suite 1600 Telephone: (212) 697-8370
New York, N.Y. 10017 Facsimile: (212)697-8295
e-mail: fsmun@fsmgov.org http://www.fsmgov.org/

Address by President Peter Christian
before the United Nations General Assembly at its 73ld session
New York, 27 September 2018 Check against delivery

President of the General Assembly, Secretary-General, Your Majesties, Heads of States and Governments,
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It is a pleasure to address this General Assembly under the able leadership of President Maria Fernanda Espinosa
Garces.

Madame President,
This Organization needs good leadership and I am sure that you will ably take us in the right direction. I offer my
congratulations to you and your Government for your election.
Madame President,
When the armed conflicts that dominated the world in the first four decades of the last century ended, the world
slipped into another war; the Cold War. A period of suspicion and deceit; an era deeply rooted in clandestine
engagement, reminding us of a great Englishman s word that the truth is so precious that it must be protected by
lies.

The fight continues today, waged between the bigger and the richer with the might of wealth with the smaller
economies aligned and marginalized, becoming again the spoils of now an economic war. Now fostering new
econo ic colonies.

As in all wars many people become innocent victims, and are often filed away simply as collateral damage, as
spoils of war, becoming possessions of victors and allies.
Madame President,
We open another General Assembly with our world facing record and serious challenges.
And yet, we ask ourselves this question: Is Pluto a planet or not? Is that a relevant question to our current Earth

conditions?
Our aim today must be to improve on the United Nation as forum on which we work to prevent this from
continuing, to seek curative measures, to slow and to stop this economic war, and as an end, hopefully to
accelerate the effort to close the gap of economic imbalance.
We also must avoid deliberate procrastination motivated by geopolitical greed for dominance and economic

1

imperialism. S ch a State only brings pain and misery to those whose only guilt is being in the path.
We must recommend what the future should hold for us.

We of the great ocean about whom someone had dubbed THE DECADE OF THE PACIFIC, must adopt a more
progressive attitude toward taking charge of our affairs and make ourselves directly relevant to matters that touch
and stain our lives.
Madame President,
The existential threat of climate change is becoming more real with every hurricane, wildfire, heat wave, and
centimeter of sea-level rise. These are the realities that many of us are seeing and experiencing. Islands within the

Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) and our neighbors, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands and Tuvalu in the Pacific
will be among the first to, literally, disappear.
In 2009 Micronesia proposed a fast action strategy using the Montreal Protocol to explicitly cut climate emissions
to avoid warming of 0.5 degrees Celsius by the end of the century. While it may sound like a small amount, it s
50% more than the warming we are experiencing today, which is already producing super storms like Typhoon

Mangkhut in the Philippines and Hurricane Florence in the US.
In order to achieve this goal we urge all countries who have not yet done so to ratify the Kigali Amendment to
the Montreal Protocol - and to accelerate the implementation of this planet-saving strategy.
On our current trajectory, many more islands will be lost, many homes destroyed, many people displaced. But we
can still avoid the worst climate impacts if we recognize the need for speed, and take fast action. The Paris
Agreement may have shortcomings, but we believe it is the best platform to achieve this goal. And we believe
that no matter how difficult and sensitive the issues associated with climate change, we need everyone onboard.
We are disappointed that some countries are considering withdrawing from the agreement and we call on them to
reconsider.

Madame President,
Micronesia is a large Ocean State blessed with abundant marine resources. A key concern for Micronesia, and all
small island developing States, is rightly focused on a healthy, productive and resilient Ocean.
The resources of the Ocean are the bedrock of the Micronesian nations. A sizable percentage of our economy
comes from our Ocean based activities - whether it is fisheries, tourism, or maritime transport.
Micronesia is committed to the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders’ declaration to safeguard the Oce n and its
resources. In this,

I join my fellow Pacific leaders as we commit to eliminate marine litter and the urgency of implementing the
Pacific Marine Litter Action Plan.
For Micronesia, our fisheries is critical to the socio-economic well-being of our people.
Madame President,
While we welcome the recent decision by the Commission to place the topic Sea-Level Rise in Relation to
International Law on its long-term program of work, we strongly recommend that the subject be placed on the
Commission’s active program of work because of the direct implications of sea-level rise on maritime baseline
and maritime boundaries.

2

Madame President,

ON GLOBAL PEACE,
To wish for peace is global. It has no bou daries.
Micronesia is encouraged by the peace reached by Eritrea and Ethiopia, and we wish the people of those
countries the very best. We also wish that other countries who are engaged in conflicts that similar resolutions be
achieved.
In our region of the world, we have a stake in the ongoing peace negotiations between the Democratic People s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea. We recognize and encourage the continuing efforts to bring peace
and stability to the Korean Peninsula. A lasting peace on the peninsula translates to a more secure and stable
Pacific Region.
Elsewhere in the world, we cannot ignore the pain and suffering of so many people caught in pockets of armed
conflicts. As world leaders, we have fallen short of our responsibilities. It is deeply troubling to see those who
wield tremendous powers, fail to take bold and decisive actions to end these serious atrocities. And we wonder if
for some unknown reason such conflicts might not be good for them politically or even economically.
And we think what a shame.
Madame President,
The United Nations needs to be relevant and deal with emerging threats. We find it deeply troubling that the
threat posed by climate change to our existence has not received the Security Council’s serious consideration.
The Pacific SIDS have made a proposal for consideration by the Council. While the proposal in itself will not
immediately save our islands, it is a step in the right direction.
Micronesia believes that a Security Council conceived in the 20th century needs to be more efficient, more
representative, more responsive, and must show greater leadership in its response to today’s new challenges.
Madame President,
Micronesia welcomes the Secretary-General’s objective of the repositioning of the United Nations development
system to deliver on the 2030 Agenda.
The United Nations development system has impact and influence when it is focused. It is of utmost importance
that its operational activities for development, take into account the need to build, promote, and strengthen the
capacity of small island developing States.
For Micronesia the role of the United Nations development system, in particular UNDP, to support and enhance
the capacity of island countries to implement the 2030 Agenda must not be over-looked. But this requires the
scaling up of UNDP presence, particularly, in our North Pacific where its presence can ake a real difference and
a crucial factor in our development efforts.
Madame President,
The United Nations represents the best hope for humanity. And we the members must ensure that it is.
I thank you, Madame President.

3

