Please check a ainst delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. KHURELSUKH UKHNAA,

PRIME-MINISTER OF MONGOLIA AT THE GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE 73rd SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
MAKING THE UNITED NATIONS RELEVANT TO ALL PEOPLE: GLOBAL
LEADERSHIP AND SHARED RESPONSIBILITIES FOR PEACEFUL, EQUITABLE
AND SUSTAINABLE SOCIETIES

New York, 28 September 2018

Please check against delivery

STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. KHURELSUKH UKHNAA,

PRIME-MINISTER OF MONGOLIA AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF
THE 73rd SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
(New York, 28 September 2018)
Theme: Making the United Nations Relevant to All People: Global Leadership and Shared
Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies

Madame President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Secretary-General,
Honorable Ladies and Gentlemen,

Distinguished delegates,
At the outset, I wish to express my heartfelt congratulations to Ms. Maria Fernanda
Espinosa Games for being elected as the President of the 73rd session of the General
Assembly.

I pledge my delegation s full support and cooperation in the discharge of your onerous
responsibilities.
Madame President,

Today, we are living in the flat, globalized and interrelated world. Our life is digitalized
to a great extent and the way of life is greatly shaped by technological progresses. In spite
of this development, we are encountering a plethora of global sore points including conflicts,
poverty, hunger, and inequality.

Hence, I am glad to represent my Government at this General debate, which will
deliberate issues of making the United Nations more relevant to all people and making the
world more peaceful, equitable and sustainable.

In the past 73 years, the United Nations outreached every member state through its
diligent activities for peace, justice and global understanding. Thus, under the Sustainable
Development Agenda, it is timely for the United Nations and in line with its founding
principles, to endeavor reaching everyone in the member states.

Mongolia appreciates leadership of the Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
reinforcing the joint efforts of member states on leaving no one behind through his reform
initiatives.

1

We are supporting his reform initiatives in the peace and security architecture which
is aimed at ensuring stronger prevention and mediation activities and making peacekeeping
operations more cost-effective, as well as in repositioning of the UN development system
which aspires to reform the UN into a more effective, we 11-coordinated, transparent and
accountable organization.
Madame President,

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute report, the world
military expenditure is estimated to have reached $1.7 trillion in 2017. This is not only an
increase from the previous year, but also the highest level since the end of the Cold war.
The armaments race is not declining and situations in some regions are instable due

to aggravating conflicts. Use of technological advancements in armed conflicts is making the
circumstances more dangerous than ever.

Mongolia has always been standing for its principled position that any conflicts should
be resolved peacefully and through dialogue.
Based on our peaceful mind stemmed from the national mentality and religious belief,
we always supported peace and security initiatives raised at the United Nations General
Assemblies and other fora and strived to be a responsible member of the organization.

Just to cite some of the Mongolia s initiatives proving its contributions to the peace
and security at global and regional echelons are the General Assembly resolutions on
Disarmament Week observed on 24-30 October every year since 1978 and Declaration
on the Right of Peoples to Peace in 1984 and the declaration of its territory as nuclear
weapon free in 1992, which is progressively being guaranteed.
There is a Mongolian saying that It’s better give a needle in time of need rather than
gifting a camel when wealthy , or as it is said in English A friend in need is a friend indeed .
Mongolians always try to assist other nations and people when they are in need or seeking
peace and stability.
There was an occasion when we brought hundreds of orphans from the DPRK to
Mongolia in the post-Korean war time and raised them. During the last decades, we have

been stretching our hands within our capacity to a number of countries, which faced natural
disasters and terrorist acts, rendering development assistance to some regional countries,
and sharing our modest experience of democratic transition.

This year we are celebrating the 70th anniversary of the United Nations peacekeeping
which has contributed immensely to the world peace and security. Mongolia first joined the
2

United Nations peacekeeping in 2002 with the deployment of unarmed military observers
and started deploying the troops in 2006. Nowadays, we are proud by our troops who are
praised by the international community for their robust, calm and appropriate approach to
peacekeeping.

As one of the top 30 troop contributing countries, as well as one the high-rankers in
terms of the deployment to per capita, Mongolia envisages at increasing its participation in
the UN Peacekeeping Operations and fully supports the Secretary-General s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Madame President,

Addressing security issues in Northeast Asia is indeed one of our foreign policy
priorities as it has direct impacts on Mongolia s security and development.
Mongolia closely follows and welcomes the recent positive developments on the
Korean Peninsula, including the Inter-Korean and other bilateral Summits that are giving an
important impetus towards confidence-building and ensuring peace and security in the
Northeast Asia. However, we are not merely observing the process, but are trying to make
our own contributions.

Since 1980’s, we have been consistently pursuing the policy of launching a dialogue
mechanism in Northeast Asia. A fruit of these efforts yielded in Ulaanbaatar Dialogue on
Northeast Asia international conference conducted since 2014 on annual basis. The

dialogue is now transforming into an open and inclusive mechanism gathering both
government officials and the academia from all countries in the sub-region. Discussion topics
cover a broad range of issues including security, energy, infrastructure, green development,
opportunities of humanitarian cooperation and others.
On the other hand, Asia is one of the most disaster-prone regions in the world. We

actively support the regional cooperation for enhancing disaster resilience, reducing disaster
risk and increasing effectiveness of disaster prevention activities. Within this framework, we
put forward an initiative to establish the Northeast Asia Disaster Risk Reduction Platform in
Mongolia. The proposal has been discussed at the Ulaanbaatar Dialogue on Northeast Asia
conferences and the second Asian Ministeral Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction
successfully organized in Ulaanbaatar in last July and received a warm support from regional
countries for implementation.

Mongolians believe that neighbors share the same disposition and interests. As
Mongolia is determined to develop strategic partnerships with its two big neighbors, it closely
follows their initiatives at the regional level and strives to engage in every possible way.
Lately, we proposed initiatives on Travel Facilitation for travelers from countries along the
3

Belt and Road and the Peace, Prosperity, Progress, Promise (PPPP) award for junior
diplomats and scholars from the Belt and Road countries.
Madame President,
There is no doubt that numerous armed conflicts, rivalries, insurgencies and terrorist

attacks, that trouble us today, are caused by the clash of civilizations and religions.
Mongolia is one of the few nations who has had no religious and ethnic wars in its
history. The Great Mongolian Empire established 812 ago was reigned by the written law
and it was a genuine home of religious freedom where Christians, Muslims, Conficians and

Buddhists treated equally and lived together without any idealogicial struggles.
In brief, the legacy of religous tolerance and respect in the Mongolian Empire, which
had covered an immense territory, is very instructive for the today s world.
More recently, in the 20th century, in the epoque of the Cold War, we were conducting

salient activities for combining voices of international Buddhists for the world peace through
the Asian Buddhists Conference for Peace (ABCP), established in 1969 and were achieving
the tangible results in the fight against the ideological divide.
Nowadays, we deem there is a pressing demand for effective dialogue mechanisms,

such as the ABCP, which has consultative status at the UN ECOSOC. Thus, we are
determined to revitalize its activities at regional and international arenas. In this regard, as a

regional hub connecting Northeast and Central Asian countries, we are stating our initiative
to host the Conference on Religious Freedom in March 2019 in Mongolia from this honorable
podium of the United Nations.
We are confident that our initiative will make constructive contributions in the new
developments of culture of peace, religious tolerance and religious freedom worldwide.
Madame President,

Mongolia is one of the early adopters of the national Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) through endorsing its Sustainable Development Vision 2030 in February 2016. As
per this Vision, Mongolia aspires, by 2030, to consolidate its democratic governance,
preserve ecological balance, eradicate poverty in all its forms and be amongst upper middleincome countries.

My Government has been taking important steps to ensure coherence between the
SDGs and the national development policy documents, that have been previously
implemented, and translate them into short- and medium term plans and programs.

4

In order to provide financing for development, the Investment Program has been

adopted in line with the Government Action Plan. Moreover, the SDGs indicators developed
on the basis of multi-stakeholders consultations will be adopted shortly.
Mongolia witnessed the economic resurge with the accelerated foreign trade turnover,
increased investment and budget surplus during the last two years. However, Mongolian

economic growth, which is highly dependent on mining and vulnerable to the commodity
prices, tends to be instable and risky for ensuring the allocation of financial resources for the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in years of commodity
price decline.
Moreover, another challenge faced by my Government is to ensure that every citizen
is to be benefited from the economic growth. For instance, following the economic growth,
unemployment decreased modestly but not poverty. Thus, we are inserting measures aimed

at shrinking income disparities and reducing poverty into all relevant Government Programs
and sectoral plans, compiling a complete database of low-income households and
supporting Public-Private Partnership. In order to resolve the problems comprehensively, the

National Program on Reducing Poverty and Unemployment will be launched shortly.
Madame President,
This year we are celebrating 70th anniversary of the Universal Declaration on Human

Rights (UDHR), a milestone document in the history of human rights.
Pursuant to the ideology of the Declaration, Mongolia has made remarkable
achievements in the field of promotion and protection of human rights. In recent years,

particular importance has been attached to the issues such as enhancing gender equality,
protecting rights of children, elderly and persons with disabilities, fighting against human
trafficking and drug, improving freedom of speech and expression.

In 2016-2018, as Mongolia is serving as member of the Human Rights Council for the
first time and it has been an honor for us to contribute to the global endeavors to protect and
promote human rights.

Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and
freedoms set forth in the UDHR can be fully realized. Following the 2016 New York
Declaration on Refugees and Migrants, member states constructively negotiated the issue
of migration for the last two years. We expect that the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration to be adopted in December in Marrakesh on the historic day of the 70th
anniversary of the UDHR will be a valuable document for the protection of rights of all
migrants.
5

In the last two decades, the world is witnessing the highest level of population
displacement and this phenomenon did not bypass my country, which has a small population
and is located in highlands of the Northeast Asia.
Madame President,

We are experiencing a high volume of internal and external migration due to a number
of reasons including unemployment and poverty.

Owing to a large movement of citizens from countryside to cities since 1990 s, as of
2017,45 percent of our total population lives in the capital city of Ulaanbaatarwith net annual
growth of 22.3 percent. It results in a more social ramification including poverty,

unemployment, poor access to health care services and air pollution in the capital city
compared to any other places.

Citizens of Mongolia are highly educated and the fact that the second biggest package
of the state budget in 2018 was allocated to the education sector, demonstrates the
government s firm commitment to prioritize human resource development. However, school

availability and quality of education do not always match up with the demographic growth,
urbanization pace and modern education standards.

While the pupil-classroom ratio in schools and kindergartens has decreased together
with the population density in rural areas, the case is opposite in the urban centers. A
memory makes anxious where at one of my public meetings held last year in Ulaanbaatar,

a citizen told me how his 10-year-old kid had to walk home at 9 pm through dark streets in
winter time at a temperature of minus 20-25 degrees Celsius after attending the third shift at
his school which does not provide school bus service.

The Government of Mongolia is planning and implementing policies and programmes
that aim, by 2030, to address effectively the challenges faced by the capital city, including
shortage of kindergartens, about 30 schools in suburbs functioning in three shifts, overload
of family hospitals, hazardous impacts of air pollution on people s health, as well as the issue
of unemployed people in Ulaanbaatar which accounts one third of the national
unemployment rate.

Furthermore, about 5 percent of our total working age population is working abroad
and this number tends to grow. Thus, we need to take comprehensive measures to resolve

the issues of their health care, social insurance, dual citizenship and improve the related
legal environment.

6

Madame President,

In our time, climate change is another daunting challenge for humanity that goes hand
in hand with peace, security and development issues.

The Paris Agreement has been ratified by 179 countries. However, the
implementation does not meet the expectation and the fulfilment of shared responsibilities
by member states remains insufficient. Therefore, we welcome and support the Secretary-

General's timely initiative to convene the Climate Summit in September 2019 for reviewing
the Paris Agreement commitments.

Global warming and climate change impacts all nations which are felt more intensely
on the economic and social development of the least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island developing states. In this regard I would like to
highlight that by the initiative and leadership of Mongolia, the International Think Tank for
Landlocked Developing Countries has been established in Ulaanbaatar and fully
operationalized last May.

The International Think Tank, the first ever intergovernmental organization
representing the 32 landlocked developing countries, will conduct policy research works and
implement feasible projects to addess common challenges and protect interests and
positions of those countries with the purpose of augmenting their benefit from international
trade. I am confident that you will continue your cooperation and support to the activities of
this Think Tank as previously.
In Mongolia, where extreme weather conditions prevail and economy mostly relies on
mining and agriculture, the scope, frequency, and negative impact of disasters, such as
earthquake, desertification, soil erosion and forestfires have increased in recent years.

Taking this opportunity, I wish to inform you that on the occasion of the UN Climate Week,
my delegation is launching a documentary titled Blue Gold . We are sharing this
documentary with you not only for showing the devastating impact of the climate change in
Mongolia, but also alarming about similar consequences and appealing for timely
safeguarding steps.

In conclusion, from this honorable podium of the United Nations, I would like to call
on unity of the all nations under mutual trust, consciousness of our responsibilites for the
sake of not only current but also future generations, as well as to strive for Peaceful,

Equitable and Sustainable societies.

Thank you for your attention.

7

