Prime Minister of Montenegro Duško Marković
Address at the General Debate of the 73rd session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations
New York, 28th September 2018

Madam President,
Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is my pleasure to address you on behalf of Montenegro, one of the
youngest members of the United Nations, which has clearly and
unequivocally confirmed commitment to joint action within the UN system
in the past 12 years since the renewal of its statehood.
Allow me, in the beginning, to congratulate Mrs. Maria Fernanda Espinoza
Garsez from Ecuador on her election as the President of the 73rd session of
the General Assembly, and wish her success in carrying out this responsible
duty.
I also want to thank the President of the previous 72nd Session of the
General Assembly, Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, for his outstanding leadership and
contribution to strengthening the role of the General Assembly and
stepping up the dialogue with the Member States.
Dear Miroslav, I congratulate you on another job well done, with gratitude
for the lasting friendship you cherish with Montenegro.

Ladies and gentlemen,

I welcome the choice of the topic of the General Debate of the 73rd Session.
I firmly believe that in these challenging times concerted action and
common responsibility for peaceful, just and sustainable societies are the
only correct way that will lead us to the goal; that the United Nations be
relevant to all people on the planet.
Given the complex situations and challenges that the world is facing, the
grave divisions on numerous grounds, the catastrophic consequences of
the spread of terrorism and violent extremism, as well as climate change,
there is no dilemma that only by joint action can we contribute to resolving
conflicts and preventing further suffering of innocent people.
Historic multilateral agreements that we have agreed in the previous period
show what we can do with joint action. These agreements, primarily – the
2030 Development Agenda, but also the Climate Agreement, make a vision
of our common future and confirm that multilateralism is not an option,
but the only effective means.
For the full implementation of the adopted Agreements, the reform of the
UN and the strengthening of the central role of the World Organization in
multilateralism is necessary more than ever. Therefore, this 73rd Session is
of paramount importance for the return of confidence in the United
Nations i.e. that, regardless of sometimes justified criticism, they are
capable of achieving the NOBLE objectives for which they were founded.
We cannot say that these lofty goals have been achieved in today's world.
Let's not hide this fact, let's look it in the eyes and take on our share of
responsibility for today's, but also tomorrow's world.
Montenegro strongly supports the process of reform of the United Nations.
I am confident that the issue of fragmentation of the World Organization
can be solved with a stronger binding of all three pillars of action and
greater transparency, efficiency and accountability. I believe that the
implementation of the complex reform agenda and the strong leadership of
Secretary-General Guterres will result in a more efficient Organization,

which will contribute to reducing the suffering throughout the world and
ensuring common peace, security and prosperity.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow me to remind you in a nutshell of the views of Montenegro on some
of the key topics on the agenda and this session of the General Assembly:
First of all, Montenegro is strongly committed to the policy and
implementation of the sustainable development goals, which are
complementary to the reforms that we are implementing in the process of
European integration.
Furthermore, although it has a small share in global emission and
population statistics, Montenegro is committed to the implementation of
the Paris Agreement through responsible and sustainable management of
its development potentials. Montenegro welcomes the initiative of the
Secretary-General to hold the Climate Change Summit in 2019.
In terms of finding solutions to conflicts around the world, we are aware
that the international community often fails to prevent crime and suffering
of a large number of people. In addition to the longstanding conflict in
Syria, the findings of the Commission on Inquiry Human Rights Violations in
Myanmar additionally warns of the importance of prevention and timely
addressing the causes of instability. Our moral and political responsibility is
to ensure the eradication of impunity for crimes committed. In this regard,
the role of the Security Council, the International Criminal Court and the
criminal tribunals is crucial.
Montenegro expresses regret over the stalemate in resolving the
longstanding Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the lack of progress in resolving
the worsening humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. On this occasion,
we call on all parties to uphold the international law and refrain from
unilateral actions that distort confidence and make it difficult to reach a
mutually acceptable peace agreement. We strongly support the resuming
of negotiations and the application of mediation in order to reach a
peaceful solution.

Conflicts in Syria, Yemen, Libya and other countries, as well as the
longstanding Palestinian-Israeli conflict, require an immediate end to
violence, respect for international law by all parties to the conflict, and
urgent finding of peace solutions through diplomatic means.
In order to eradicate terrorism and violent extremism, we must step up
efforts to strengthen the implementation of the preventive pillar of the UN
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The focus of our activities must be on
the integration of vulnerable and marginalized groups, and the care for
young people as the main actors of a better future.
We strongly support global efforts towards disarmament and nonproliferation of mass destruction weapons. I am certain that by consistent
application of the relevant treaties on nuclear disarmament and arms
control, we can get to a world without nuclear weapons. Therefore, we
support the activities of the United States of America, the Republic of Korea
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea intended to ensure the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Madam President,
I will touch upon two very important aspects of today's world, which are
intertwined: human rights and humanitarian challenges.
Any violation of human rights poses a threat to democracy, the rule of law,
and a step towards a possible conflict. At the moment when we
commemorate 70 years since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 25 years since the adoption of the Vienna Declaration and
Program of Action, but also 20 years since the Declaration on Human Rights
Defenders, we are witnessing more and more examples of grave human
rights violations around the world. It is unacceptable that we remain silent
about this fact. In addressing these situations, we acknowledge the
important role of the Human Rights Council, and the need for its more
efficient and effective functioning in order to build on the results achieved
so far. A strong and determined commitment to a progressive approach to

human rights is necessary, as well as improving the application of the
highest standards in the protection of human rights at all levels.
In the field of protection and promotion of human rights at the national
level, significant progress has been made in the protection of women and
girls, children, LGBTI population, and the integration of marginalized
groups. We aim to strengthen and expand the national human rights
dialogue, which should contribute to a better application of international
standards.
Montenegro's commitment to the issue of gender equality and the fight
against violence against women is reaffirmed by our chairmanship of the
Executive Board of the UN Women. We strongly advocate for the greater
role of women as leaders and important decision-makers, stakeholders in
conflict prevention, resolution and reconciliation.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Although humanitarian challenges are on the rise, I emphasize the
importance of defining key multilateral agreements under the auspices of
the United Nations, i.e. the two global compacts on migration and
refugees.
Adoption of the Global Compact on Migration will contribute to better
management of international migration in all dimensions, to the benefit of
all states and communities, including migrants. The government is working
in all fields to better regulate migration processes. Montenegro undertakes
all that is necessary for the possible admission of migrants and refugees, in
accordance with international standards in this area, while taking into
account its national capacities.
Bearing in mind its experience in the admission of a large number of
refugees during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, Montenegro has
contributed to defining the Global Compact on Refugees. We believe that
the Global Compact on Refugees will contribute to the joint action of the
international community in terms of the mass movement of refugees and
providing support to the countries of admission.

Ladies and gentlemen,
In the past 12 years since independence restoration, Montenegro has made
rapid progress in the state-building process based on the lofty democratic
values.
Our results are not just a product of political pragmatism, but a vision of
today's Montenegro geared towards the stability and prosperity of its
citizens. Montenegro has been a new member of NATO since last year.
Aware of the necessity of a safe and secure environment, we are
committed to the issues of global security, preservation and enhancement
of common values, both within NATO and in UN peacekeeping missions.
Membership in NATO has given us a strong incentive to further strengthen
the rule of law based on the highest democratic values.
But at the same time we are vigorously implementing the economic
reforms that resulted in a high economic growth rate of over 4% in the
course of the last year and in the first half of this year. These measures are
based on sustainable development that will secure a higher level of living
standard in the longer term.
At the moment, Montenegro is a frontrunner in the Western Balkans in the
process of joining the European Union. We have, among other things,
earned this position with our multinational and multireligious harmony,
which is our historical feature and value. We are committed to
strengthening institutions and their sustainability with a determined fight
against organized crime and corruption.
Distinguished Excellencies,
Allow me to draw your attention at the very end to the current situation in
the region I come from.
The Western Balkans is now a better place to live than 20 or 30 years ago,
owing to the efforts of the international community and the Governments

of the countries of the region. We in Montenegro believe that there is no
better future for our countries and citizens than that in the European
Union.
But we are confident that it also comes as a natural choice for Europe.
European values are the only and best answer to growing nationalism and
populism in our view.
However, in order to achieve this goal, actions must be taken more
decisively with a clear vision of a whole, stable and stronger Europe in
every corner of it.
Montenegro has been and will remain committed to promoting regional
stability and cooperation and developing good neighborly relations. In that
sense, we welcome the signing of the historic agreement between
Macedonia and Greece, which contributes to the European and EuroAtlantic perspective of the Region. We hope for the successful
implementation of the Agreement reached, which will be conducive to
creating a favorable environment for the further overall development of
the Region.
We also welcome the negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina. We
believe that in the coming period it will result in the achievement of a
lasting agreement and a full normalization of relations, which is in the
interest of both the Region and Europe.
Madam President,
Montenegro will continue to be a responsible partner to the United
Nations. Through membership in the bodies and agencies of the UN, it will
be contributing to the UN's tackling of global challenges. In addition to the
membership and Montenegro’s chairing of the Executive Board of the UN
Women, the candidacies have been presented for the upcoming period for
membership in the Economic and Social Council 2020-2022, the Human
Rights Council 2022-2024 and the UN Security Council 2026-2027 .

We believe that we will gain the support and confidence of United Nations
member states in the aforementioned bodies, which will be an opportunity
to contribute to a stronger and more effective UN action.
The key interests of our countries are shared - more peace, security and
prosperity for our citizens.
In this respect, the United Nations must continue to play a strong role.

Thank you for your attention.

