Republic of Mozambique
Office of the President

“Making the United Nations Relevant to all Persons: Global
Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable
and Sustainable Societies”

STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY FILIPE JACINTO NYUSI, PRESIDENT OF THE
REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE, AT GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73RD SESSION OF
THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
New York, 25th September 2018

Madam President of the 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly;
Mr Secretary General of the United Nations;
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government;
Excellencies;
Ladies and Gentlemen!

It is with a great honour that we address the 73rd Session of the United Nations on
the General Debate.
We warmly congratulate Her Excellency Maria Espinosa Garcês, for her election to
chair this Session of the General Assembly which meets under the theme “Making
the United Nations Relevant to all Persons: Global leadership and shared
Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies”. We would like
to assure you, Madam President, of Mozambique’s full support as you discharge your
mandate.
We commend the outgoing President, Mr Miroslav Lajčák, for the remarkable success
of his tenure during which he was consistently committed in mobilizing the
international community for the implementation of Agenda 2030 on Sustainable
Development.
We want to express our appreciation to the Secretary General of the United Nations,
Mr António Guterres for the dedicated work he has been doing in leading the
organisation for the cause of international peace and security and sustainable
development.
Allow me also to express our deep condolences for the passing of Mr Kofi Annan,
former Secretary General of the United Nations. Annan has honoured Africa and the
world with his dedicated devotion for global just causes.
The General Assembly, equally, takes place in the year when the icon for the struggle
for freedom, peace, equality and fraternity, Nelson Mandela would turn a hundred
1

years old. Nelson Mandela and Kofi Annan are two eminent personalities that should
inspire our collective strive for a better world, for peace, prosperity, security and
welfare of the peoples.

Madam President;
Excellencies!
Mozambique recognizes the role of the United Nations in promoting dialogue and
upholding the principle of peaceful settlement of conflicts that continue to affect
peoples and nations and are the source of human rights violations and hinder
inclusive and sustainable development.
The United Nations is the mother forum for multilateral dialogue that brings together
commitments of States in the context of implementation of globally assumed
Agendas and other instruments on the achievement of shared goals.
The uneven and fractured world needs multilateralism to overcome its gaps lacunas.
The progress made so far, is an unequivocal evidence that the sharing of
responsibilities is a global imperative, and an essential vector to building a
harmonious, just and peaceful world.
I am referring, for instances, to the implementation of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, the efforts aimed at eliminating nuclear weapons, to regulate and
humanize migration to avoid humanitarian catastrophes.
In the list of multiple examples, I also cite those issues related human rights and
good governance, peaceful resolution of conflicts and development financing, among
others.

In this regard, Mozambique supports the Secretary General in his efforts to reform
the United Nations System and make it adequate to its purposes. The Country

2

commends his inclusive approach of involving the United Nations Member States in
each stage of the process.
In addition to the reforms underway, it is also urgent to fast-rack the Security Council
reforms, an important element that will contribute for the reaffirmation of the
relevant role of the United Nations in finding sustainable solutions to challenges of
peace and security the humanity is faced with.
The difficulties to reach consensus among the United Nations Member States to
initiate negotiations on this matter, also limit the capacity of the Security Council to
act, as one the pillars, without which the success in the implementation of the
Agenda 2030 will be a mirage.
These reforms will ensure that the United Nations are truly relevant to all peoples,
which we all cherish.

Madam President;
Ladies and Gentlemen!
Regarding peace and security, Mozambique continues to follow with deep concern
the prevalence and resurgence of inter and intra State flash points of political
instability, particularly in Africa and the Middle East. We have followed the tension
in the Korean Peninsula, as well as fundamentalism and acts of violent extremism.
Our country hopes that peace initiatives underway at global level and the actions to
contain recruitment and funding of terrorist groups will result into opportunities to
promote further the people’s harmonious development
The right to self-determination of the People of Western Sahara and Palestine
remains a concern of the international community. lack of progress in the
referendum on self-determination of the People of Western Sahara continues to be
a source of concern to peace loving people.
We believe that the solution to the Palestinian problem is based on the existence of
two States, side by side, in the light of the principles of international Law, namely
3

those related to good neighbourliness, peaceful co-existence, dialogue and
tolerance.
Mozambique, once again, joins most States present in this hall, in appealing to the
normalisation of political, diplomatic, economic and financial relations between
Cuba and the United States of America.

Excellencies!
Mozambique has also dedicated efforts to removing the obstacles to Peace and
promoting inclusiveness and an enabling environment for equitable and sustainable
development.
Commitment to the national constructive dialogue has enabled meaningful progress
towards the settlement of differences and building an effective, lasting and
sustainable peace which provides the necessary environment for the strengthening
of national unity, reconciliation and resumption of the country’s economic growth.
Soon after becoming the Mozambican Head of State, in January 2015, I decided to
personally commit to finding peace for my Country.
I did so because both my country and the Humanity, were still the target of tragic
conflicts which proved that all wars always punish peoples.
Fortunately, for more than two years guns have been silenced in my country, thanks
to the direct engagement in dialogue with the now late leader of Renamo. Now there
is consensus that everything has been done in my Country, peace was the best
achievement I recorded as a President.
As a result of the dialogue, the Mozambican Nation witnessed in June this year the
approval by the National Assembly, of the Republic of Mozambique Constitution and
the Review of the Electoral Law, and innovative elements were introduced in the

4

decentralization of the country, with a view to reducing post electoral conflicts and
deepening of democracy.
These steady steps in the political dialogue are an indelible milestone in the
multiparty system in the country, as we intend to hold the General Elections any
armed political party like in the previous cycles. Therefore, a process of
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration of remnant Opposition armed
elements.
As a proof that Mozambique upholds democracy, local elections will be held in 53
Municipalities, on the 10th October 2018, with the participation of various political
parties and civil society organisation. Already towards the end of next year general
elections will be held within the new consensually agreed framework with the Party
that engaged in the armed conflict. This framework has been approved by the
National Assembly.

Due to the complexity of the matter, in technical and financial terms, the
Government seizes this solemn opportunity to thank the international community for
the support and care. One cannot build with ease what has been destroyed. Hence,
we appeal that more assistance is rendered so that peace, reconciliation and
development can be worked out and the process of Disarmament, Demobilisation and
Reintegration of remnant armed elements due to be initiated shortly materializes in
the country. The Mozambican people are determined to live in peace.
The Government of Mozambique is currently committed to fighting organised crime
which destabilises and threatens our efforts of national development, we are
determined to neutralize the groups of criminals that are attempting to undermine
the order and tranquillity in some districts of the north of Cabo Delgado Province.
In our measures against these criminals we count on the support of all because this
is a repugnant crime of global nature which involves both nationals and nonnationals, who are still faceless and without arguments and tending to spill over to
other neighbouring countries.

5

We cannot think of democracy, I said, of Human Rights, when the fundamental
Human Right, the Right to Life is endangered.

Madam President!
Mozambique takes with a deep sense of responsibility, its commitments in relation
to the Sustainable Development Goals.
It is in this context that our 2015 – 2019 National Governing Agenda is aligned with
the Agenda 2030.

We are convinced that the implementation of these goals will result in the creation
of a fairer, more equitable and solidarity society. These are the premises for the
broadening of social justice in our country.
Our Government has made efforts so that the implementation of its national agenda
creates opportunities for its citizens and, particularly women and the youth, within
the framework of the demographic dividend in our society.
“Making the United Nations Relevant to All Persons”, presupposes not leaving
anyone behind, and it is a theme so important that it should not be neglected.
Therefore, special attention must be payed to policies and strategies meant to
protection and full enjoyment of persons’ rights, promotion of gender equality and
equity, as well as the capacity building of women, the youth and other vulnerable
people who are the majority of our peoples.
As alluded to, social justice, means continuous promotion of gender equality, a field
where we have made significant strides at political, economic and corporate level.
We have also undertaken efforts to increase access to basic services of health,
education, water and sanitation for all populations.

6

Another key element to establish the relevance of the United Nations to persons is
to ensure food and nutrition security, by prioritising agriculture in our national
development strategy.
Since the inception of the new administration in the country, in 2015, on the basis
of domestic resources mobilisation and the dedicated efforts of our people, we have
been able to substantially increase agricultural, livestock and fisheries production
and productivity.
In this way, we intend to achieve the goal of sustainable development of ending
hunger well before 2030, which requires an increase of public and private
investments.
Regarding the fight against corruption, another evil that undermines the
achievement of our global, regional and national goals, our government has
promoted and conducted actions with a view to attaining high standards in practices
of good governance, in all its dimensions, political, economic and corporate. To this
end, we have adopted laws, policies and strategies for a fierce fight against
corruption.
We continue building institutional and human capacity to ensure the enforcement of
anti-corruption laws, as well as to raise awareness of social actors and institutions
on the negative impact of this scourge, always abiding by the established principle
of separation of powers.
In the context of climate change, Mozambique, as one of the countries most exposed
to this phenomenon, continues to take measures of adaptation and resilience within
the framework of the Paris Agreement, to which we are Party since June this year.
We have adopted the policy of biodiversity conservation, under which 25% of our
national territory is dedicated to conservation. At the same time, we are promoting
the development of communities in conservation areas or adjacent areas engaging
the communities in the protection and preservation of this valuable natural resource.

7

We have fostered the use of renewable energies in rural areas, sustainable
management of natural resources and conservation of ecosystems and biodiversity,
as well as the sharing of benefits.
From this podium we want to call for the international cooperation in terms of
financial and technological means to build capacities to complement our own efforts.

Mr President;
Ladies and Gentlemen!
We would like to conclude our remarks by reiterating the Government of the Republic
of Mozambique’s unconditional commitment to continue performing its part in the
critical role of the United Nations to find solutions to problems affecting humankind.
The United Nations will always be a platform that brings us together around the
collective commitment towards the noble ideals on which this universal organisation
has been founded: “saving future generations from the scourge of war” and
“promoting social progress and better living standards in greater freedom”.
Let us remain faithful to these supreme interests enshrined in the United Nations
Charter and let us work together to build peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies.

Thank you very much for your attention!

8

