REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA

TLIB^fYJ
(Check against delivery)

STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY DR. MAGE G. GEINGOB,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF NAMIBIA AT THE

GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73"^ SESSION OF THE UNITED
NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

SEPTEMBER 26, 2018

NEW YORK

Your Excellency, Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces, President of the 73^^
Session ofthe UN General Assembly;
Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government;
Your Excellency, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General ofthe United Nations;
Madame President,

I wish to congratulate you on your election as President of the 73^^ Session of
this August Assembly.

On July 21, 2018, the people of Namibia and our friends around the world, laid to
rest our first Foreign Minister, Dr. Theo-Ben Gurirab. He represented our liberation
movement, SWAPO, here at the United Nations for over 15 years. Under his

Presidency at the 54^ Session ofthe United Nations General Assembly we adopted
the Millennium Development Goals, the precursor to the Sustainable Development
Goals.

The family ofDr. Gurirab,the Government and people ofthe Republic of Namibia,
have been deeply touched by the outpouring of condolences and sympathies
following his death. We are deeply appreciative ofthe memorial service held in his
honour here at the UN Headquarters.

Two weeks ago, I travelled to Accra for the burial of Kofi Annan,the 7^ Secretary
General of this venerable Organization - - an African son whose flame has been

extinguished, but whose light will shine on through the ages. A few days ago,in this
very hall, we gathered to pay tribute to this revered personality and architect of
peace. He was a man ofgreat stature, who dedicated his entire adult life towards the

pursuit of global peace and security.

May the souls of these distinguished Sons of Africa and the UN, rest in eternal
peace.

Madame President,

Following the end ofthe Cold War and the old bi-polar dispensation, the world has
slowly drifted ever more worryingly towards unilateral action. This development
goes against one offundamental tenets of democracy upon which our organization
is built. Democracy might have its flaws but it is by far the best system that enables
key values ofthe United Nations, necessary for sustained inclusive development. It
is for this reason that we must embrace multilateralism with greater urgency, to

counter unilateral action. It is also for this reason that we fully concur with the

Secretary General's sentiments as contained in his Statement to this Assembly that,
and I quote,"As today's problems grow ever more global, multilateralism is more
important than ever".

The Republic of Namibia is founded upon the principles of democracy, the rule of
law and justice. The fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in our Constitution
include virtually all the rights and freedoms recognized in international human rights
instruments. However, these instruments in themselves are not sufficient to bring
about sustainable development.

Namibia recognizes that there are existing and emerging threats, and challenges that
continue to fhistrate individual and collective efforts to achieve greater socio

economic progress. To this end,Namibia has embraced sustainable development and
is fully committed to Agenda 2030 Agenda, its principles, goals, targets and
indicators. As a matter offact, Namibia has integrated all 17 Goals and their targets
in its National Development Plans.

As a dry and arid country, often affected by seasonal droughts and floods, we
have stepped up our efforts to implement the SDGs in critical areas, such as energy,
water and terrestrial ecosystems. In this respect, Namibia wishes to benefit from the
assistance rendered through the "Technology Bank established in Istanbul,on 4 June
2018, to enable the timeous identification of spatial locations of drought and flood
areas.

In July this year, Namibia presented its Voluntary National Review on the
implementation of the SDGs. This was Namibia's first opportunity to present on
progress made in implementing the 2030 Agenda on the world stage and as
complemented by the AU Agenda 2063,in pursuance ofthe "Africa We Want".
While Namibia has witnessed sustained economic growth over much ofthe last ten
years, unemployment remains persistently high. Nevertheless, Namibia has
observed one ofthe fastest reductions ofpoverty levels in our region over the last 10
years - from 28.8% to 17.4%. I am also happy to inform that life expectancy in
Namibia has risen from 58 to 65 years. However, inequality in Namibia remains a
challenge, as reflected in the skewed ownership of land, where white Namibians
owns 70 percent of all agricultural land.

In our pursuit of creating favourable conditions to fight poverty and maintain peace

and stability, Namibia will hold its 2"^ National Land Conference during the first

week of October 2018. In preparation for the Conference, the Government

conducted consultations in all our 14 Regions, to ensure an inclusive process. We
believe in consultation. If diplomacy fails, people go to war. That is why we are
pursuing an inclusive consultative process, with the full knowledge that "inclusivity
spells harmony and exclusivity spells conflict." We have made a concerted effort to
include as many stakeholders as possible and to ensure that everything will be done

within the ambit of our laws. As a result, we call on our development partners to
support the outcome ofthis Conference, so as to continue assisting us in the process
ofsocio-economic transformation.

Madame President,

I have stated before that Namibia's classification, as an Upper-Middle Income nation
does not take into account the skewed distribution of income. It prevents us from
accessing Official Development Assistance and affordable, concessional fmance.
The situation has the potential to jeopardize efforts in Namibia and other developing
countries to fully achieve Agenda 2030.

Communicable diseases threaten to jeopardize the attainment of Agenda 2030. For
that reason,Namibia endorses the call to end tuberculosis endemic and reaffirms her

commitment to unite with the world in achieving this goal. With a population of

approximately 2.5 million people,Namibia ranks the 9^ highest affected and TB one
of the top three causes of hospitalization. The Government of Namibia has
demonstrated its commitment to address TB by including related targets into the

5^ National Development Plan and also by ensuring that 70% of available funding
for TB comes from domestic resources. I should caution that inadequate human and
financial resources, high levels ofpoverty, and lack ofpublic health services in rural
areas remain a concern. As the chairman of Southern African Development
Community (SADC), our region reaffirms its commitment to the Declaration,
through the "Harmonized Surveillance Framework for HIV and AIDS,Tuberculosis

and Malaria" and resolves to join the international community in the fight against
Tuberculosis.

Madame President,

I congratulate the Secretary General for the launch of the United Nation's Global
Youth Strategy. Africa has the fastest growing youth population. In my capacity as
Chairperson of SADC,I wish to inform you that the region has adopted a Strategy

to achieve industrialization by 2063. In ^is regard,the 38^ SADC Summit, which
took place in August 2018, in Windhoek, Namibia, adopted the theme,"Promoting

Injfrastructure

Development

and, Youth

Empowerment for

Sustainable

Development".

We are convinced that the youth ofthe SADC and indeed ofthe world, are the future
custodians ofour social, political, economic and governance infrastructure. As such,
the youth needs to be capacitated with requisite skills and training, and economically
empowered through entrepreneurship to drive development towards inclusive
growth and shared prosperity.

The youth ofthe SADC region, like their counterparts in the world, yearn for better
prospects. They yearn for a future ofopportunity and job certainty, where the Fourth
Industrial Revolution will present opportunity and not threat. A future characterized
by rapid advancement oftechnologies, advanced robotics, artificial intelligence and
mechanization should present more opportunities for our youth and humanity at
large. The onus is on us to understand how these technologies can create
opportunities for our youth to become drivers of economic growth and industrial
development.
Madame President,

Let me emphasize that excluding women from certain spheres of life is to put to
waste skills and expertise that can contribute to sustainable development. In this
context, we applaud the Secretary General for exercising leadership and thus
reaching gender parity amongst senior management and Resident Coordinators.
Namibia is fully committed to implementing Gender Equality, which is evident in
the important role women play in politics. Women are equally represented in our
Executive and Legislature. The participation of women at the highest levels of
governance has been consolidated when the ruling SWAPO Party took a principled
decision at the 1997 Congress to increase the proportion of female delegates to the
Party's congress up to 50 percent. This was the genesis of the now constitutionally
mandated SWAPO Party,Zebra style 50/50 policy,a key indicator ofthe importance
we attach to Gender Equality. The late Secretary General Kofi Annan was right
when he said,"Gender equality is more than a goal in itself. It is a precondition for
meeting the challenge ofreducing poverty, promoting sustainable development and
building good governance". The world should do more to make gender equality a
reality.

While we commend the Secretary General for his successful reform initiatives, may
I remind this August Assembly ofthe historic pledge we all made during the World
Summit held in 2005; a pledge "to strengthen the United Nations with a view to

enhancing its authority and efficiency" and,to "address effectively ... the full range
ofchallenges ofour time." It is time to ensure we live up to that pledge.
In this regard, it is pertinent to demonstrate the political will ofthe UN Membership
with regards to redressing Africa's exclusion from the Security Council. The world
has moved on, the old and unjust order cannot persist. Africa and its 1.2 billion
inhabitants can no longer be excluded from assuming its place on this primary
decision making body.
Madame President,

For Africa and, the rest of the developing world, peace is the main foundation and
guarantor for sustainable economic growth and development. As leaders, together
with the citizenry ofthe great African continent, we need to understand that it is our

collective responsibility to maintain peace in order to enable Africa to unlock its full
potential.

Every step that advances a peaceful Africa should be welcomed. In that vein, we

commend His Excellency Abiy Ahmed, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and his
Eritrean coxmterpart. His Excellency President Isaias Afwerki for signing an
agreement to end the war between their two countries and the subsequent resumption
of diplomatic and trade ties. I am confident that this spirit of unity, peace and
security, as embodied in the AU Agenda 2063, would be transplanted tbroughout the
Horn of Africa and all parts afflicted by conflict in Africa.

Namibia is a child ofinternational solidarity, midwifed by the UN. We relied on the
solidarity of the nations ofthe world to call on South AMca to give us our right to
self-determination. Equally, we call on the implementation of the UN resolutions
and decisions, which will lead to a positive, peaceful and permanent solution that
meets the aspirations and will ofthe people of Western Sahara. In the same vein, we
reaffirm our support for the people of the Occupied Territory ofPalestine, in their
pursuit of self-determination,justice, freedom and independence, through political,
diplomatic, peaceful and non-violent means.

During the darkest days of our fight for independence, the government and people
of Cuba came to our aid, shedding their blood for our liberation, resulting in the
consequential Battle of Cuito Cuanavale, which led to negotiations, elections and
eventually, freedom. It is in this spirit of profound kinship we share with the Cuban
people that we renew our call for the lifting ofthe decades old, outdated, ineffective
and counterproductive economic and financial embargo of Cuba.

The time is now, for all of us, to demonstrate the leadership required to bring

prosperity and peace to all the world's people. It is time to lead in the spirit ofpeace,
in the spirit ofequality and in the spirit ofsustainability. It is time to make the United
Nations relevant to all the world's people. Let us seize this unique moment in history.
I thank you.

