Statement by The Ri ht Honor ble K.P.
Sharm Oli, Prime Minister and the Leader of
Nepali Delegation to the 73rd Sessio of United
Nations General Assembly

New York, 27 September 2018

Madam President,
I extend warm felicitations to you on your election to
the presidency of this Assembly.
The outgoing President deserves our appreciation for
successfully steering the Assembly s work.
We commend the Secretary General, Mr. Antonio

Gutteres, for the dedication, commitment and

leadership with which he has been serving the
Organization. ,

As we commemorate the 100th birth anniversary of
Nelson Mandela, I would like to pay my profound
respect to him and for the cause he fought for. An iconic
figure, he was a great human soul and remains a source

of inspiration for peace, justice, harmony, forgiveness
and reconciliation.

This year we have lost an outstanding diplomat and
visionary Secretary General Kofi Annan. I also pay
sincere tributes for the tremendous contributions he
made to promote peace, development and human rights

in the world.
Madam President,

I bring greetings and best wishes from the Land of
Buddha and Sagarmatha also known as Mount Everest
for the success of this session.

Since I addressed from this podium in 2006, Nepal has
undergone historic political transformation.

Through dialogue and deliberations, through mutual
respect and accommodation, we steered a uniquely
successful home-grown, nationally led and owned
peace process.

It was about peaceful transformation of an armed
conflict.

It was about restructuring of the State and promoting

unity in diversity;
It was about making Nepali people truly sovereign and
as source of state power; and '

It was about institutionalizing and consolidating all
those achievements . in a democratic constitution

through a popularly elected Constituent Assembly.

Despite the diffic lties in the wake of devastating
earthquakes, the political leaders rose to the occasion
with a common resolve to promulgate the constitution

in September 2015, thereby fulfilling the seven-decade
long people s aspiration to write their own constitution.

The Constitution of Nepal not only consolidates
democratic polity under a federal republican order, but
also embodies extensive rights and freedoms of the
people. Separation of power, checks and balances, the

rule of law, independence of judiciary, periodic
elections, inclusive and proportional representation are
the defining features of the Constitution.
Our vision is of a comprehensi e democracy that

empowers individuals not only politically but also
socially, economically and culturally.

Implementing the Constitution was another paramount
task before us. We accomplished this historic task last
year through free, fair and impartial elections of federal,
provincial and local levels with record turnout and the
participation of the people from all sections of our
society. Most importantly, the elections brought 41
percent of women into elected bodies. We remain

committed to bridging the gap of the remaining 9
percent.

The elections not only ensured democratic rights of
Nepali people in the widest possible manner, it has also
produced a strong government in many years. The

Government that I head has over th ee-fourth support of
the parliament. Governments in the provinces also

enjoy strong majority support. We have achieved much

needed political stability through these landmark
elections.

With these historic achievements, we have laid the
foundation towards creating an egalitarian and just
society where all citizens are treated equally and receive
equal protection and opportunities. Social justice
remains at the center of our polity.

The United Nations and the international community
supported our peace process for which we are grateful.

Nepal s case is a unique exam le of peaceful and
democratic transformation. It is a telling testimony that

dialogue triumphs the differences; and ballot triumphs
the bullets.

We believe that what Nepal has achieved in conflict
transformation can be an inspiring success story for

many people longing for peace in different parts of the
world. We are willing to share our experiences and

provide our insights.

With hard lessons lea ed in the arduous journey of
democratic transition, we have now emerged as a

confident nation, capable of sustaining political gains
and undertaking a course for economic transformation.

Cognizant of the need for accelerating the process of
development, my Government has set a vision for

'Prosperous Nepal and Happy Nepali'.

We will realize this vision with the right mix of prudent
utilization of natural resources and the optimal
mobilization and management of human resources that
we are endowed with. We count on continued goodwill,

support and cooperation from the international
community in our development endeavours.

Our foreign policy guides us to maintain amity with all
and enmity with none. It has shaped our independent
outlook on global issues which we consider on merit
basis. .

7

We believe that regional and global efforts complement
our national development efforts.

In line with our foreign policy priority to regional
cooperation we have recently hosted the 4th Summit

meeting of BIMSTEC. We would like to see a
revitalized SAARC as an important regional
organization.

Excellencies,

The world today is at an important juncture; with a
unique juxtaposition of perils and promises.
Challenges ranging from poverty, terrorism, climate
change, food insecurity, forced displacement and
natural disasters to arms race continue to confront the

global community. Intra sate conflicts have taken heavy
toll on millions of lives. For the first time in decades,
world hunger is rising after a prolonged decline.

8

In many regions, peace remains obscure. Inequality
within nations, as well as among them, is increasing.

Countries have failed to adopt sustainable production
and consumption patterns.

In this context, the theme of the general debate Making

the United Nations relevant to all people: Global
leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful,
equitable and sustainable societies resonates well the
need of our time.

Madam President, Nepal supports the seven priority
areas that you eloquently outlined in your inaugural
address to this Assembly earlier this week.
I hope the current session will seriously deliberate on
these priority areas with seriousness and urgency they
deserve.

Here lies our political will and determination.

With this commitment we must ensure that the voice of

the people struggling for their rights, liberty, freedom
and j stice in various parts of the world, including
Syria, Yemen, Palestine, and many other places must be
heard and addressed.

Madam President

The p rsuit of making the UN relevant to all people is
well captured in the philosophy of heaving no one
behind .

In its third year, global efforts in the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda appear too few and far insufficient.
Needless to say, the least developed countries are the

battleground on which the 2030 Agenda will be won or
lost.

10

Development in LDCs appears dismal despite a record
performance of global economy. Inte ational support
measures are failing to make a dent. Implementation of

the internationally agreed commitments made in their
favour is far below our expectation.

Reaching furthest behind first is not a luxury. It is not a
charity either. It is an international obligation, a duty
and social responsibility.

The impact will be fully realized only when external
support measures respect national ownership and

leadership, are aligned with national priorities, come

through national system, while they help build
productive capacity, job creation and develop human
resources.

11

Only through smooth access to market, removal of trade

barriers, injecting finance and investment, building
capacity and transfer of technology and overcoming the
infrastructural bottlenecks can enable LDCs and
LLDCs take path to sustainable development and
integrate themselves in the global value chains.
Ladies nd Gentlemen,
When it comes to climate change; the clock of caution
is ticking loud.
The impact of climate change burdens the poorest and
the most vulnerable countries, like my own country

Nepal, despite their negligible emission. We cannot
remain a bystander when snow-clad mountains, known

as water towers of the world, are receding and glaciers
are retreating, erratic weather patte s causing floods
and inundation in the plains. It is an unpleasant irony
that we have been victim of the catastrophes that we did
not contribute for its causality.
12

The impacts of climate change on mountain and small
island countries have been felt as existential threat. The
loss of lives, properties and bio-diversity, and
increasing phenomenon of calamities are becoming
untenable.

A matching and robust response is required. We cannot

evade from the responsibility nor will there be any
excuse for inaction. We must act decisively in ensuring

climate justice that respects the principle of common
but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities. To make this happen, international
cooperation and collaboration for adaption and
mitigation is sine qua non. The Paris Agreement must

be implemented in its entirety and good faith.

13

Madam President,

The health and wellbeing of our children and youths is
an investment for future. Delivering quality education,
imparting skills, and spurring innovation can make a
virtuous composite to enable youths to be relevant and
be able to contribute to society and nation building.
We must support for the full development of their
potentials, their creativity and energy to flourish.
Inculcating entrepreneurial spirit and creating decent
job opportunities for the youths can fuel economic
development and help positively transform our
societies.

At the same time, we must also inculcate them with the
civil and moral values so that they become a force for
harmony and tolerance in society.

14

Madam Preside t, ¦

The frontiers of technologies are ever expanding, and
they have been major driving force for societal
transformation. But the digital dividend is unevenly

distributed, while the digital divide is widening.
Technology has been a owerful agent of change and
transformation. At the same time, technological

revolution is disruptive. The developing countries,
especially LDCs, are struggling to cope with the new
modes of production and consumption. We must create
an environment to ensure easy access to affordable

technology and free the barriers for their transfer. This

will provide a level playing field to all countries to
benefit and propel economic growth through new
technologies.

15

E cellencies,

This year, the UN has taken boldest of the reform
initiatives in decades. The cross-pillar restructuring of
the organization gives us an important opportunity to
strengthen its development pillar and prove its
efficiency in delivery.

We believe that the repositioned UN development
system will better deliver on 2030 Agenda.
To ensure a sound system, learning the new methods by
a new generation of Country Teams is important. But

more than that, unlearning the old habits - that implored
us to undertake this reform - is equally important.
What matters also in the reform is the transformation of
the culture. The new culture must have accountability,
transparency and national ownership at its core.

16

Nepal welcomes the reforms undertaken in peace and
security architecture as well as management of the

organization. IM should reflect the mosaic of its
membership, and achieve greater efficiency and
effectiveness.

The Security Council reform is long overdue. Any
reform must reflect the current realities and ensure

justice to historically under-represented and developing
countries.

Ladies nd Gentlemen,
Nepal reaffirms its principled stand for a general and
complete disarmament of all weapons of mass
destruction.

In this context, we welcome the recent efforts made by
the United States and two Koreas towards
denuclearization and peace and stability of the Korean
peninsula.
17

Nepal welcomes the Secretary General's Agenda for
Disarmament with a hope of renewed impetus to
disarmament. Nepal commends the beginning of
deliberations under the Kathmandu Process for
developing innovative confidence building measures in
the Asia Pacific region.
No region is immune from the menace of terrorism.

Nepal strongly condemns all acts of terrorism,
committed by whomsoever and for whatever purposes.

Nepal calls for an early conclusion of a comprehensive
convention against terrorism.

Madam President,
Never has been the issue of human mobility so
prominent in the agenda of the United Nations.
Nepal looks forward to the December Conference for

the formal adoption of the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration.
18

Ensuring human rights and wellbeing of all migrant
workers remain our priority. Nepal believes that the
Compact will serve this purpose and make migration
work for all.

Nepal has hosted thousands of refugees for decades on
a humanitarian ground. The international community

must uphold the refugees right to return to their

homeland safely and with full dignity.
Madam President,

The complexities and intractability of global conflicts
render the current thrust on conflict prevention even
more important. Mediation, an under-utilised tool, can

be applicable in all phases of the conflict continuum.
Nepal recently marked the six decades of partnership
for peace with the UN. Nepal has responded to every
call, even at the shortest notice and without national
caveats.
19

Nepal welcomes the Secretary General's initiative of
Action for Peacekeeping7 and has endorsed the
Declaration on Peacekeeping Operations. Troops and
police contributing countries must be given fair
opportunities to serve at the leadership positions both in
the headquarters and the field missions.

A sustained partnership for capacity building of
peacekeepers and providing for their safety and security
can enhance performance of peace operations. Nepal
condemns attacks on peacekeepers. Ending the

indignity of sexual exploitation and abuse is a must.
Nonetheless, peace missions alone cannot substitute the
home-grown preventive as well as conflict resolution
measures. Our own experience tells that peacekeeping

cannot do what the politically negotiated settlements
can.

20

Excellencies,

Nepal s commitment to the protection and promotion of
human rights is total and unfli ching.
We hold that development, democracy and respect for
human rights as - interdependent ' and mutually
reinforcing.

As- a member of the Human Rights Council, we will
continue to play our constructive role to deliver on
Councils mandates.

The ongoing transitional justice process in Nepal
respects the comprehensive peace accord as well as the

ground reality for sustaining peace and delivering
justice. We will not allow impunity in serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian laws.

21

Mad m President,
We are living in an uncertain world. Cold-war rivalries
are re-surfacing. Trade tensions are building up.

Multilateralism is being questioned.
The Secretary General s opening statement largely
captures the realities of contemporary world and the

sentiment of the Member States; be it in the field of
peace and security or in sustainable development,
climate change, migration and technology.
We underscore the centrality of the United Nations as
the most legitimate multilateral forum to deliberate on

the challenges that we all confront globally. It is the
obligation of all Member States to preserve the sanctity
of multilateralism and uphold respect for international
law. The problems that we confront today at global
scale can only be overcome by global collaboration and
partnership in absolute trust and confidence.

22

We are yet to make international system truly inclusive
that promotes fairness, equality and justice for all states,
bigger or smaller.
Before I conclude, Madam President, let me reiterate

Nepal s profound commitment to the principles and
purposes enshrined in the UN Charter. We remain as
firm as we have been in past 63 years since we joined
this organization
The onus to give direction to the world lies on us. Our

collective wisdom and leadership should aim at the
realization of aspiration of all for peace and prosperity.
Let us make a collective resolve that the 21st century
history will not be written as a history of confrontation
and conflict; of poverty, exclusion and under¬

development; of injustice and exploitation.

23

It s ould rather be a history of cooperation and
harmony* of prosperity, inclusion and development;
and of justice and fairness.
Thank you.

' 24

