STATEMENT
by H.E. Mr. Denis MONCADA COLINDRES
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Nicaragua
at the 73rd Session of the General Assembly
October 1, 2018

Unofficial Translation

His Excellency, Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations
Her Excellency, Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces, President of the General Assembly.
Ladies and Gentlemen, Representatives of the Member States.
Ladies and Gentlemen Delegates,
Receive the Message of Peace from the People of Nicaragua and from PresidentComandante Daniel Ortega and Vice-President Rosario Murillo.
1. Three years after the Adoption of the 2030 Agenda, we continue to witness a world in
crisis originated by savage capitalism, by interference and violations of international law
and the sovereignty of our peoples, with the use of force, attempts of coups d'etat and
destabilizations that threaten the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals

proposed in the 2030 Agenda.
2. Nicaragua has resisted the attempts of a coup d'etat; our country has once again won
peace, fraternal coexistence and the progressive return of normal daily life.
3. The attempted coup d'etat that we have conquered in Nicaragua is the result of this
interventionism and has left us with serious damage and sequels, such as economic damage,
death, destruction, and terrorism.

4. Terrorism disguised as peaceful protest, atrociously killing citizens, policemen, setting
on fire public and private property, assaults, violations, extortion, torture, and cruel
inhumane degrading treatment.
5. In the region, Nicaragua has a high recognition as a factor of regional stability, peace and
security with important positive indicators in economic, political, social development,
poverty reduction, gender equity and citizen security, being a barrier against inte ational
organized crime, Maras and Gangs, terrorism and narcoactivity, all state policies that we
continue to develop.
6. We assure and reiterate that in Nicaragua we love peace, we strengthen security, and we
promote and defend human rights in an integral way.
7. The Government and the Nicaraguan people defend the principle of independence and
sovereignty, as established by the Charter of the United Nations, therefore, we demand and
require the cessation of any interventionist policy that violates international law, with
interventionist actions in Nicaragua and against the brother peoples of our America and the
world.

8. The Government and the people of Nicaragua have worked in a sustained manner to
meet the objectives of Agenda 2030. Until April of this year our country was experiencing
sustained and approximate economic growth of 4.7% per year. Our projects and socialeconomic programs to eradicate general poverty at the national level, managed to reduce it

from 42.5% in 2009, to 24.9% in 2016.
9. Extreme poverty went from 14.6% in 2009, to 6.9% in 2016.

1

10. Today we are once again facing the threat of the United States to curb the social,
economic and cultural development of our people. We denounce these interventionism
threats as they have introduced a bill in their Congress that orders the inte ational financial
organizations to oppose the granting of loans to Nicaragua.
11. For Nicaragua, to contribute to inte ational peace is to achieve general and complete
nuclear disarmament, that is why we have signed and ratified the first Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, we call on other countries to ratify this historic Treaty.
12. The Government of the Republic of Nicaragua has supported the denuclearization of the
Korean Peninsula through dialogue and communication between the authorities on both
sides. We welcome the rapprochement between the two Koreas and the realization of the
third inter-Korean summit as well as the Joint Declaration of September in Pyongyang that
the two Korean leaders agreed on and that is seen as a breakthrough to alleviate the tension
of the peninsula and the substantial elimination of the danger of war in the whole peninsula.
13. The Government of the Republic of Nicaragua hopes that nuclear weapons will be
dismantled in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner and that the countries involved
will cooperate and, in this way, ensure firm and lasting peace on the Korean peninsula.
14. The Government of Nicaragua supports the nuclear negotiations between the Islamic

Republic of Iran and E3 / EU + 3, which resulted in the completion of the Joint Action Plan
(JCPOA) on July 14, 2015. We emphasize that this agreement demonstrates that dialogue
and diplomacy are the most appropriate means of solving these problems, as an essential
part of making multilateralism work.
15. Nicaragua condemns the criminal blockade against our Sister Republic of Cuba and all
its extraterritorial measures and ramifications. Nicaragua rejects any coercive economic
measure to try to bend the will and spirit of freedom and sovereignty of peoples and
governments. It is unacceptable for our country the use unilateral coercive economic
measures as a selecti e political instrument to illegally change governments. This year we
will once again vote against the unjust blockade.
16. Our Sister Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, its Bolivarian People and the legitimate
Government of President Nicolas Maduro, have all our Solidarity and we have condemned
the assassination attempt against President Nicolas Maduro and the threat of military
intervention against the People and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
17. It is necessary to continue supporting decolonization in the world, supporting the
Palestinian, Saharawi, Puerto Rican and the Falkland Islands of Argentina.
18. Nicaragua advocates for the conformation of the Two States, the State of Israel and the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its Capital, according to the 1967 borders, living
in Peace and Harmony.

19. We reiterate our total Solidarity with the Government and People of Syria in their fight
against International Terrorism and in the defense of their Sovereignty and Territorial
Integrity.
20. Humanity continues clamoring for Peace, even after 73 years, our Organization has not
managed to fully comply with the objectives set in relation to Peace. Given this lamentable
situation, the call for "Reinvention" of the UN, is urgent, as proposed by the Nicaraguan

2

Priest and Foreign Minister, Miguel D'Escoto during his Presidency in this General
Assembly. To achieve this, we must promote the indispensable transformation, in order for
this Organization to serves the interests of all its members and the whole of humanity.
21. We wish to emphasize that during the Presidency of this Assembly, in 2008, Father

Miguel D'Escoto (RIP), whom we rightfully call the Chancellor of Dignity of Nicaragua,
developed and fought until the end, precisely with these Ideas, fulfilling the Mandate of
Nicaragua to lay the foundations for the discussion of these transformations, with its
Proposal Document: The Reinvention of the United Nations.
22. We need urgent actions to combat climate change.
23. The principle of Common But Differentiated Responsibilities remains in force and the
Big emitters and those responsible for depredation, degradation, and imbalances in nature
must recognize our Losses and Damages and contribute with the recovery to the Life of
Mother Earth and of the Peoples of the World.
24. To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals we need to repeal the unilateral
coercive measures that are in violation of international law and that impede the
development plans of our countries.
25. We must work for Justice, Peace, Respect, Dialogue, Sovereign Security, in the World.
To do this, we must promote the indispensable Transformations, so that this Organization
serves the interests of all its Members.
26. Our Government and our People advocates a World with Values, where Human Beings
can count on the best of ourselves, to foster the best possible conditions for Fair,
Sustainable, Equitable, Secure and sovereign Development, in which the Advances of
Science and Technology, reflected in all areas of our Lives, are accessible and shared by
all.

27. Once again, our greetings and the hope of the Nicaraguan people, that in this 73rd
session, the Commitment that we assume will result in an open and profound Process of
Reflection, towards Compulsory Transformation, for the reinvention and democratization
of the United Nations.
Madam president,
28. To conclude, we affirm the Commitment to continue fighting for Peace, which is the
priority that the World has, that our People have, and that the conflicts that arise in different
Regions of our Planet can be overcome, through Dialogue, through Negotiation and above
all, fiee from the use or threat of the use of Force, which is what most of our Peoples long
for, from the Peoples of the Great Powers, to the Small States in Population, small in
development, but great in their Values and in their History.
Thank you so much.

3

