r

STATEMENT DELIVERED

HIS EXCELLENCY, MUHAMMADU BUHARI,
PRESIDENT OF FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA

THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73^0 SESSION OF
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN NEW YORK,

25™ SEPTEMBER,2018

Madam President,

Fellow Heads of State and Government,

Mr. Secretary-General,

Distinguished Delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

On behalf of the Government and people of Nigeria, I

congratulate you, Madam President, on your well-deserved election as
President of the 73rd General Assembly. As you embark on your

assignment, I would like to assure you of Nigeria's support in no less
measure than that which we extended to your illustrious predecessor.

His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajcak.

2.

We appreciate the effective leadership he gave the 72"^ Assembly

with such dedication, commitment,and fairness to all member states.

I also salute our distinguished Secretary-General, H.E. Mr. Antonio
Guterres, who steered the affairs of the Secretariat with focused

commitment to the collective United Nations pursuit of global peace
and security, equity and justice,inclusiveness, women's empowerment
and human rights.

Page 2 of 13

3-

It is appropriate at this point to remember with deep sadness our

late 7* Secretary- General Mr. Kofi Annan who passed away on the
eve of his 82*"^ birthday. Kofi's significant contributions to the work of

our Organisation have been acknowledged in the well deserved
tributes that poured in from around the world following his death.
4.

We in Africa, while mourning the loss of this great son of ours

and citizen of the world, take pride in the way he served humanity in

a truly exemplary manner. He demonstrated, in his calm but
determined manner, the virtues of compassion, dedication to the

cause ofjustice, fairness and human rights. He was a visionary leader
who inspired hope even in the face of the most daunting challenges.
He devoted his entire life's career to the UN and the pursuit ofits ideals

and goals. The world is indeed a better place thanks to his exemplary
service.

Page 3 of 13

Madam President,

5.

During the past year, the world saw some positive results and

encouraging signs from the bilateral and multilateral efforts of the
international community to address conflicts, crises and threats to
world peace. We particularly commend the efforts ofthe leaders ofthe
United States, North Korea,and South Korea,to realise our shared goal
of a nuclear free Korean Peninsula.

6.

In this connection, we acloiowledge the commitment to peace

shown by President Donald Trump and Chairman Kim Jong-Un by
initiating a historic Summit. We urge that they continue this positive
engagement.

7.

Regrettably, many ofthe crises and threats to peace and security

around the world which we debated last year as we did over several
previous years remain unresolved. In some cases, matters got worse.

The continuing plight of the Rohingyas in Myanmar, the protracted
Israeli/Palestinian conflict, the wars in Yemen,and Syria, and the fight

against international and local terrorism such as Boko Haram and AlShabaab come to mind.

Page 4 of 13

8.

The terrorist insurgencies we face, particularly in the Sahel and

the Lake Chad Basin, are partly fuelled by local factors and dynamics,
but now increasingly by the international Jihadi Movement, runaway

fighters from Iraq and Syria and arms from the disintegration ofLibya.

9. In Myanmar, the carnage appears to have thanlcfiilly abated
somewhat. We commend the United Nations for staying focussed on

the situation ofthe Rohingya people,to bring their suffering to an end,
and hold to account the perpetrators of the atrocious crimes

committed against innocent and vulnerable members of this
community, including women,children and the old.
10.

The international community should strengthen its resolve to

combat ethnic and religious cleansing everywhere. We support the
UN's efforts in ensuring that the Rohingya refugees are allowed to
return to their homes in Myanmar with security, protection, and

guarantee of citizenship. We note the indication by the Government
of Myanmar ofits willingness to address these issues and we encourage
them to do so expeditiously.

Page 5 of 13

11.

In this context, Nigeria commends the Government and people

of Bangladesh in particular and all other countries and organizations

that have contributed to shouldering the burden of providing shelter
and other vital assistance to the Rohingya Refugees.

12. The carnage and the worsening humanitarian situations in Syria
and Yemen continue unabated. But the international community
cannot afford to give up on the Syrian and Yemeni people. We must

pursue all efforts to find peaceful negotiated political solutions to
these wars which cannot be won by force of arms alone. Regarding
Syria, we hope that the UN sponsored Geneva process and the Sochi
initiative, led by Russia, Iran, and Turkey advance this objective.

13.

The International community must keep up the pressure to

encourage the parties to pursue the path of dialogue, negotiations and
inclusiveness in resolving their sectarian divides and bringing to an

end the immense human suffering in Syria as well as Yemen. We
commend Turkey, Jordan, Greece, Germany, Italy and France for
hosting the millions ofthe refugees fleeing these brutal conflicts.

Page 6 of 13

14-

The situation in the Middle East, grave as it has always been, is

now worsened by developments since our last meeting. Nigeria
continues to call on the Israelis and the Palestinians to make the

necessary compromises in the interest of justice, peace and security,
in line with our numerous UN resolutions and applicable international
laws.

15.

Unilateral, arbitrary and insensitive actions only prolong the

conflict and undermine world peace and security. The deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Gaza is an appalling result of unrestrained

use of power. We urge both parties to re-engage in dialogue on the
basis of relevant UN resolutions, the Madrid Principles, the Quartet

Roadmap and the Arab Peace Initiative, among others.

16.

Nigeria reaffirms its unwavering support for a just two-state

solution, negotiated without intimidation and with Israel and
Palestine existing side-by-side in peace and security.
17.

The crises in the Middle East have deep roots and have remained

unresolved for too long. Yet, we should not fall into self-defeating
despair and conclude that they are not amenable to solution.

Page 7 of 13

18.

We should draw inspiration from the remarkable leadership that

got Ethiopia and Eritrea to restore long-lost hope for peace between
them, a remarkable show of statesmanship which has now galvanised

neighbouring countries, including Djibouti and Somalia to push for
peace in the sub-region. I believe that with hard work, commitment,
and a disposition to compromise and necessary sacrifices, peace is
achievable in the Middle East as well.

19.

Most crises usually have a variety offestering causes and effects.

It is the failure to address them early and effectively that lead to out-

of- control conflicts. Addressing them includes national and
international collective actions which positively impact on peoples

and communities. Hence,'Making the United Nations relevant to all

people: Global Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful,

Equitable and sustainable Societies' which is the theme for this year's
General Assembly, is very apt indeed.

Page 8 of 13

Madam President,

20. A topical consequence of the current conflicts around the world
is the irregular migration of affected people from the Middle East,
Afghanistan, and Africa to Europe. Irregular migration entails huge
avoidable loss ofhuman lives, puts strains on services in host countries
and communities, and fuels anti- immigrant and racist sentiments in

Europe. That is why we welcome the successful conclusion of the

negotiations on the first-ever Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration, and we look forward to its adoption in Marrakech

later this year. The aim is to protect the rights of migrants worldwide,
while addressing the concerns of countries of 'origin, 'transit', or
'destination' alike.

21.

Migration is a constant in human affairs. We in Africa are grateful

to countries who treat migrants with compassion and humanitynotably Germany, Italy and France.

22. Irregular migration is not a consequence of conflicts alone, but
of the effects of climate change and lack of opportunities at home.

Climate Change remains one of the greatest challenges of our time.
Very close to us at home, it is our lot in Nigeria, together with our
neighbours around the Chad Basin, to live with the Climate change
Page 9 of 13

consequences of a drastically shrunk Lake Chad and the parching up
of otherwise fertile arable lands.

23. The Lake was a major source of livelihood to more than 45

million inhabitants of the region. Its shrinking meant loss of
livelihoods and they are now rendered poor and vulnerable to the
activities ofextremists and terrorist groups. The instability thus caused

in the sub-region intensified internal displacements leading, among
other consequences, to intense economic competition especially
between farmers and herdsmen.

24. This is why we continue to call for a rededicated international

engagement to accelerate the recovery efforts in the Lake Chad Basin
to address the root causes of the conflicts in the region. What is

required is continuous and robust UN cooperation with national
Governments and sub-regional and regional organisations such as the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union, to enhance capacity in conflict

prevention, conflict management and peace building.

Page 10 of 13

25-

With regard to the Lake Chad Basin plight, I extend our heartfelt

appreciation to the United Nations, the Governments of Germany,
Norway, the United States, Sweden, the United Kingdom, France and
a host of other development partners for their laudable support in

assisting us to address both the humanitarian challenges and the on
going stabilisation drive in the region.
Madam President,

26. Corruption within countries and illicit flow of funds across
national boundaries have huge negative impact on the stability, peace,

and economic prospects of millions in developing countries.

Corruption significantly deprives national Governments of resources
to provide meaningful livelihoods to their populations who are
predominantly youths, thus giving rise to more irregular migration.
27. The fight against corruption,therefore,involves us all. It is in our
collective interest to cooperate in tracking illicit financial flows,

investigate and prosecute corrupt individuals and entities and
repatriate such funds to their countries of origin.

Page 11 of 13

28. Fighting corruption or resolving international conflicts, crises

and wars; defeating terrorism and piracy; curbing arms trafficking and
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons which fuel these
conflicts, particularly in Africa; stemming irregular migration by
addressing its root causes; and the many other global challenges we

are faced with today can only be effectively addressed through
multilateral cooperation and concerted action.

29. The only global institutional framework we have to address these
challenges is the United Nations System. That is why we continue to

call for the strengthening of the Organisation and making it more

effective by speeding up the pace of progress towards its reform,
including that of its principal organ, the Security Council. The
reconstitution of the Council to make it more equitable and more

representative of our global community is both a political and moral
imperative.

30. We believe that a reformed Security Council with expanded
membership in both the permanent and non-permanent categories, is

in accord with prevailing international consensus and it is in our
collective interest to do so. It is high time we stop skirting round the
issue and establish achievable benchmarks and time frames for these
reforms.

31.

I assure you all that in this advocacy, 1 am only reflecting

Nigeria's deep and abiding commitment to our Organisation and its
founding principles and goals. From the date we joined in 1960, we
have contributed our quota to the fulfilment ofthe mandate ofthe UN.

We have been active participants in many Security Council and African
Union authorised Peace Keeping operations around the world,

beginning with the Democratic Republic of Congo operations in i960.
32. Furthermore, Nigeria has always mobilised the required human
and material resources to achieve set United Nations goals, including

the recently adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We
are resolute in complementing the efforts and examples of the United
Nations to promote gender equality and youth empowerment as
necessary pillars for sustainable development.

33. Without these, there can be neither enduring peace nor security.

As we set and implement our national policies to achieve these goals,
we, in the spirit of international solidarity, will readily cooperate with
other nations seeking to achieve similar goals for their own

populations to help ensure that no one is left behind.
34. 1 thank you all for your attention.

Page 13 of 13

