General Assembly
Seventy-third Session

26 September 2018
Statement by hLE. Ms. Etna Solberg
Prime Minister of Noruuay

President, Excellences, ladies and gentlemen,

In 1945, when we established the United Nations, e pledged to save future generations
from the scourge of war. To ork together to promote economic and social advancement
To uphold respect for human ri hts and fundamental freedoms for all.

Our job is not done. Challen es remain, but pro ress can and must be made. Our common
global interests are also national interests. We can achieve more when we act together.

Both our prosperity and many of our challen es are the result of global trends. Trade
conflicts, violent e tremism, climate change and instability at the lobal level directly affect
us at home. But so do the benefits of world trade, the global fi ht against infectious diseases,
and the rule of law. '

The 17 Sustainable Development Goals recognise that lobal challenges are national
challenges, and that the are closely interlinked. The goals require us to take both national
and international action.

(Check against delivery)

We must deal ith the challenges of globalisation hile at the same time maximising the
benefits for our citizens. Our job is to deliver security, jobs, education and healthcare.
Workin to ether has enabled all of us to do far more than we could have done alone.

Norway has taken national and international action. Throu h our national policy to promote
sustainable livelihoods. Through our Nordic and European partnerships on economic and
civic inte ration. And throu h global action to promote peace and security, sound
management of the oceans, fair and re ulated trade, education for all, and global health
measures.

Together we have achieved impressive results. Because international cooperation works.

E treme povert has been halved, people live longer, child mortality rates are falling, and
more irls attend school than ever before. Global political cooperation, global trade, and
international law have been crucial to this progress.

President,

We have to recognise that globalisation has not been equally beneficial for all. This is a very
real challenge. Exclusion can spur radicalisation. It can undermine confidence in
international institutions and cooperation. Eventually it could weaken respect for
international la , human rights and even our security architecture.

To counter this, we must secure the future welfare of a rapidly growin population. This
re uires both protection and reform of fundamental trade norms. We cannot afford to let
protectionism, discrimination and economic rivalry define our future.

The WTO is essential for Norway and our interaction with the world. I believe rules-based
trade is just as important for our partners. Free trade creates winners. Protectionism does
not.

(Check against delivery)

In order to benefit all, rights, rules and responsibilities must be modernised to fit our current
global economy. This is vital if we are to build a world where people s potential, creativity
and ho es for the future can be realised through cooperation, e change of knowled e and
trade.

Increased protectionism forces us to reflect on what less international cooperation would
entail.

President,

As we agreed in 1945, all nations must unite in a commitment to maintain international peace
and security.

The consequences of instability affect us all. And global security threats require global
responses. The Security Council must be able to act, and so must we - as nations and as
re ional or anisations. Areas of conflict and instability are breeding grounds for violent
e tremism and international terrorism,

The conflict in Syria is but one e ample. Many different actors are involved, both state and
non-state. Banned weapons of mass destruction have reappeared. Humanitarian access is

obstructed. Respect for human rights and international law is undermined.

On my own continent, Europe, fundamental rules and principles of international law are now
in jeopardy. Ukraine’s soverei nty and territorial integrity within internationally recognised
borders must be restored.

Violent extremism, conflict and instability lead to humanitarian crises and violations of
human rights. These in turn are some of the main drivers of both regular and irregular
migration.Terrorism and violent extremism affect us all and are not limited to any single
ideolo y, reli ion or belief.

(Chec against delivery)

Norway is standing up a ainst violent e tremism and terrorism. Not in response to individual
incidents, but as a lon -term foreign policy commitment. We are one of 79 members of the
global coalition against ISIL By working to ether we have achieved si nificant results on
the ground.

Still, in the continued fi ht a ainst violent extre ism, we must apply a whole-of-societ
ap roach. We must address the root causes. In the Middle East and else here, includin in
our o n countries and continents. We must brin individual perpetrators to justice and
prevent impunity.

Norway believes that those responsible for grave violations of international humanitarian law
must be held accountable. We have, from the beginning, been a staunch supporter of the
ICC as an independent institution. At the same time, security is closely linked to sustainable
development.

We must boost trade and job creation. Build capacity for generating domestic revenue.
Strengthen public service delivery. And combat corruption. Corruption fuels inequafity,
crime, instability and violence.

President,

Conflict can reverse years of spcial and economic progress. Conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and disarmament are vital if we are to reach the Sustainable Development
Goals.

We should heed the Secretary-General s call for a sur e in peace diplomac . Norway is
doin its part. Since the end of the Cold War, conflict mediation and resolution has been a
cornerstone of our forei n policy.

(Check against deli ery)

For more than 25 years, we have been engaged in efforts to resolve conflicts around the
world. From the first Oslo Accord in 1993, to on oing work in Colombia and the Philippines,

and back to the Middle East.
We have learned an important lesson from our efforts: ne otiatin a peace a reement is
always difficult; but implementin the agreement is even harder.

The majority of conflicts recur. In fact conflict recurrence is more common than the onset of
ne conflicts. This means that the best way to prevent conflict is to ensure that peace is
sustainable.

Norway remains committed in Colombia, the Philippines and elsewhere, just as we remain
committed to helping to achieve a negotiated two-state solution between the Israelis and
Palestinians.

President,

The adoption of Agenda 2030 with the 17 Sustainable Development Goals demonstrated the
uni ue value of the United Nations. We have a reed on a universal development agenda - a
roadmap to the world we want.

The SDGs are closely interlinked. Achievin oal 16 on peace, the rule of law and stron
institutions is crucial for ensurin that funds are not lost to corruption.

And achievin the SDGs related to economic conditions, will make f nding available that
can be used to make progress on other goals.

But we have no time to lose. Sustainable chan e cannot be brou ht about overni ht. National
ownership is critical, but civil society, the private sector, trade unions and the scientific
community all have a catalytic role to play.

(Chech against delivery)

President,

Health is an area where it is easy to see that the SDGs apply to us all. Health is both a human
ri ht in itself and a prerequisite for development Investin in national health systems is
expensive. But failing to do so can prove even more costly.

The World Health Organization is working to create a lobal action plan for a simpler health
architecture. This is a response to an initiative by Ghana, Germany and Norway. The. action
plan will be presented in Berlin in October.

Prevention saves lives, reduces human sufferin and enhances economic and social
development. Norway is proud to be hostin the first replenishment conference of the Global

Financin Facility (GFF) in Oslo on 6 November, and will contribute substantially.
President,

Progress on one SDG will stimulate pro ress on others. For example, child mortality rates
fall when mothers have an education.

However, there are still more bo s than irls who et an education. We have to put irls at
the centre of our education efforts. But just oing to school is not enough. This is why
Norway has focused on teachin quality and learnin outcomes.

Ensuring qualit education requires continued international financing, and the financing ap
is considerable. It is therefore important to mobilise domestic resources and private funding
alon side official development assistance.

Norway is doin its part. So far this year, we have allocated approximately 440 million dollars
to lobal education. And we will now increase our support to education efforts targeting irls

to nearly 40 million dollars for the period 2018 to 2019.

(Check against deliuery)

President,

Clean and healthy oceans that are sustainably harvested are a prere uisite for reaching the
SDGs. 50 % of the world s oxy en comes from the oceans. And 30 % of the world s C02
emissions are absorbed by the oceans.

Our oceans offer us enormous renewable resources. A source of great promise and

economic potential. Almost half of the world's population already depends on the oceans for
nutrition and employment. But in order to ensure a sustainable ocean economy, we must
produce more from the oceans.

However, the sustainability of our oceans is threatened. By 2050 they could contain more
plastic than fish. Marine litter is one of the fastest rowin en ironmental concerns. Since I
started speakin , a further 200 tonnes of plastic will have ended up in the sea.

The UN Environment Assembly has taken a bold step and adopted a vision of zero discharge
of plastic litter into the ocean. Now e must translate this into action. Mana in our oceans
sustainably is crucial. Increased global funding is imperative.

Norway will di deep to contribute. We have no time to lose.

This is why, earlier this week, I established the High-Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean
Economy, made up of heads of state and government from all continents. We aim to promote
science-based decision-makin in the fields of ocean economy and ocean mana ement.

We ill cooperate closely with the UN Special Envoy for the Ocean and other ocean
initiatives. We aim to present our report in 2020.

(Check against deiiuery)

President,

For seven decades, Norway has been a consistent supporter of the United Nations and a
rules-based multilaterar order. We are one of the largest financial contributors to the UN.

We consistently allocate 1 % of our ross national income to development aid. There is broad
support for the UN and for our enga ement in sustainable development and peace across
the political spectrum.

In 2021 it will be 20 years since Norway last had a seat on the Security Council. We are ready
to serve again.

If e are elected, we will work to make the Security Council more transparent, efficient and
representative. We will work with other member states - re ardless of their size, wealth or
eo raphical location - to find common solutions.

We will draw on our experience of peace and reconciliation processes. As women s ri hts
and participation are crucial for lasting peace and stabilit , we will keep this issue hi h on
our agenda.

To ether with partners from many re ions, Norway will support initiatives for sustainable
oceans and forests. We will hi hlight the consequences of climate change and the link
between security and sustainable development.

We will promote reform of the Council to make it more transparent and representative and
better equipped to deal with current lobal realities. Norway will continue to be a consistent
partner to the UN.

We will continue to seek common solutions to the challen es we face in our common future.

(Check against delivery)

And we do of course ask for your support for our candidature.

Thank you.

(Check against delivery)

