statement by

H.E Mr. Yousef bin Alawi bin Abdullah

Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs
United Nations General Assembly
Session

New York

29 September 2018

Check against delivery Nations

Permanent Mission of the Sultanate ofOman to the United Nations

5 Dag I-hwunarskjdld Plaza 305Fmsi 47" Slreei. 12"'Floor. .\'e^v York. NY 10017 Tel: (212) 355-3505 Fax: (212) 644-0070

Madame President,

At the outset, I would like to extend the warmest congratulations to you

and your friendly nation, on your election as President of the 73rd
session of the United Nations General Assembly, and I assure you the

support of the Permanent Mission of the Sultanate of Oman to your
Excellency's efforts in order to ensure the success of the current session.

We are also pleased to express our appreciation to your predecessor, H.
E. Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, for the manner in which he steered the work of
the previous session, and for the decisions that were taken during his
tenure.

I also would like to seize this opportunity to commend the efforts
exerted by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, H. E. Mr.
Antonio Guterres in strengthening the role of the Organization and

developing its mechanisms, so as to achieve the goals, principles and
charter of the United Nations.

Madame President,

The work of the United Nations must foeus on facing challenges,

settling international disputes and conflicts, achieving peace.

Hence, in the spirit of my country's firm believe that dialogue and
negotiation are the most convenient means of resolving difference; we
confirm that the Sultanate of Oman will spare no effort in supporting the

initiatives that will achieve peace, spread security and stability in the
Middle East and the World.

We consider that peace is a central building block for stability and
development. As such, we hope that member countries shall cooperate
within new perspectives that are consistent with the principles of goodneighborliness, respect for the national sovereignty, and non
intervention in the internal affairs of other States.

Madame President,

The Palestinian Cause is the central problem for the Middle East.
Therefore, the cooperation of the International Community in creating a
suitable environment to help the parties involved end the conflict is
considered, as a matter of particular strategic urgency. We think that
despite the difficult current situation and the stalemate in dialogue,
however, it is convenient to create favorable conditions for positive
discussions between the Palestinian and Israeli parties, to reach a
comprehensive settlement, based on the two-state solution, since not
establishing a Palestinian State will perpetuate violence and terrorism.

We, in the Sultanate of Oman, are willing to make every effort in our
disposal to restore the optimistic environment, in order to reach a
comprehensive agreement, taking into account, the future of peaceful co
existence in the Middle East, particularly between Palestinian and Israeli
generations. For, achieving a peaceful environment between the
Palestinian and Israeli parties is essential to establish peace in the region.

We also call upon countries of the world, particularly, the United States,
which has an essential role in achieving peace and stability in the world,
to consider the future of this Cause from the perspective of supporting
orientations in peace, facilitating the work of international organizations,
and not sacrificing peace.

Madame President,

The suffering of the Republic of Yemen, manifested in a tragic
humanitarian and economic situation due to the collapse of infrastructure
in health, education, and other crucial services that affect the daily life of
citizens, as well as the spread of diseases and inadequate medical
treatment and medicines, requires all of us to double our efforts to help
Yemen.

The international community has to adopt a humanitarian project that
would enable access to humanitarian aid by the Yemeni people in
different provinces, and facilitating the use of airports and ports for that
end, because the dire humanitarian situation requires taking such
measures.

In this context, my country welcomes the efforts pursued by the United
Nations and the countries of the Coalition to establish a humanitarian

medical airlift to patients with critical conditions, so that they receive
medical treatment via scheduled flights, under the auspices of the United
Nations and in collaboration with the Yemeni parties.

Also, my country supports the efforts of the Special Envoy to Yemen,
Martin Griffins and calls on facilitating his mission in holding meetings
and consultations with all Yemeni parties, and facilitating their

transportation to participate in such meetings. We envision that the
political solution should take into account, the Yemeni reality, and that
all Yemeni parties and Political Forces, in Yemen and abroad, should be
given a chance in determining a prosperous future of their country.
I would like to confirm that the facilities and humanitarian assistance

provided by the Sultanate of Oman to the brotherly Yemeni people is
continuing, and that the land, sea and air entry/exit points, between the
Sultanate of Oman and Yemen, which is the only available means for the

brotherly Yemenis to cross and interact with the outside world, shall
remain open on grounds of brotherly and neighbourly considerations,
deep historical and social ties between the Omani and Yemeni peoples,
and for the impact of humanitarian suffering of Yemenis on us.

As far as the Syrian crisis is concerned, violence is receding apparently
in several Syrian areas, due the effort led by the Russian Federation, the
Syrian Government, the United States, and the European Union and
regional countries, through the plan to reduce violence and tensions.
Undoubtedly, the collaborative effort had a significant role in combating
terrorism; and we hope that such efforts and joint cooperation continues
in Syria and other conflict areas.

We also laud the efforts achieved by the Special Envoy to Syria, Staffan
de Mistura in helping the Syrian parties develop the constitutional
foundation, and build on what has been accomplished in Geneva, Astana

and Sochi to stop the war and reach a national reconciliation that ends
the conflict.

Madame President,

My country would like to welcome the positive developments in the
African Horn Region and the understandings reached by States in the
region, which will result in restoring confidence and ending differences.

We welcome the efforts led by the Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed and the pivotal role played by his country, which shall translate
into achieving security and stability in the African Horn.

In conclusion, my country renews its call upon all countries of the world
to adhere to the principles of United Nations and International Law, and
resolve differences in peaceful means, without resorting to wars, and
consequently, their tragic fallouts, so that there would be security,
stability, development and prosperity for the peoples of the world.
Thank you.

