Permanent OBsetverMission
cfthe State of(Palestine

llji^lll
I' ffcjff'OiSea—As ^

to the Vnitedl!Nations

Statement by
H.E. Mr. Mahmoud Abbas

President ofthe State ofPalestine
United Nations General Assembly
73''^ Session
New York

27 September 2018

Check against delivery

115 East 65^^ Street

New York. NY 10065 Tel. (212) 288-8500

Fax (212) 517-2377

Jerusalem is not for sale and the Palestinian people's rights are not up for bargaining
In the name of God, the most merciful and beneficent

Excellency, Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa, President of the United Nations General Assembly,
Excellency, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,

In these days lastyear, I came before youappealing for freedom, independence andjustice for my
oppressed people, who are suffering under Israeli occupation for more than fifly-one years.
I return to you today as this colonial occupation continues to suffocate us and to undermine our
serious efforts to build the institutions of our cherished State, which this august General Assembly
recognized in the year 2012.

This yearthe Palestinian National Council, the parliament of the State of Palestine, convened and
renewed the legitimacy of our national institutions through the election of a new leadership for the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people. This Parliament undertook important decisions, which oblige meto review theagreements,
political, economic and security alike, that have been reached with the Israeli Government, and to
also review the future of the Palestinian National Authority, which has been rendered without
authority.

The Parliament also instructed me to suspend the Palestinian recognition of Israel until Israel

recognizes the State of Palestine on the 4 June 1967 borders, and also instructed me to approach
the international courts, including the International Criminal Court (ICC), to investigate Israel's
breaches of treaties and the Israeli occupying forces' aggressions and settler terror against our
people, our land and our holy sites.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Last July, Israel adopted a racist law that crossed all the red lines and called it the "Nation-State
Law of the Jewish People". This law denies the connection of the Palestinian people to their
historic homeland and dismisses their right to self-determination and their history and heritage, as
well as the United Nations resolutions relevant to the Palestine question and the agreements
concluded with Israel. This law will inevitably lead to the creation ofone racist State, an apartheid
state, and nullifies the two-State solution.

This law discriminates against the Palestinian-Arab citizens in Israel, granting the right to selfdetermination exclusively to Jews in Israel and legislating discrimination against those Arab
citizens, who constitute 20% of the population of Israel, in addition to other non-Jews who have
immigrated to Israel. This law strips them oftheir rights as citizens.
This law constitutes a gross breach and real danger, both politicallyand legally, and reminds us of
the apartheidstate that existed in South Africa. We therefore reject and condenm it in the strongest
terms. We further call on the international community and this august Assembly to act to reject it

and condemn it as a racist, illegal law and deem it null and void, just as the United Nations
condemned apartheid South Africa in several resolutions in the past, bearing in mind also that
thousands of Jews and Israeli citizens have rejected and protested this law and 56 Knesset
Members out of 120 voted against it.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

This racist law talks about what is called the "land of Israel". Can you ask the Israeli government
what exactly constitutes the "land of Israel", what the "borders" of the State of Israel are? I
challenge anyone to tell us what they are.

This racist law constitutes another stigma on Israel and anyone who consents to it. This law is just
like other Israeli laws that legislated the theft and confiscation ofthe land, properties and funds of
the Palestinian people.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

We have always fully and positively engaged with the various initiatives of the international
communitythat have aimed at achieving a peaceful solution between us and the Israelis, including
the Arab Peace Initiative, which was recognized by the Security Council in its resolution 1515
(2003). We continued on this path with the administration of President Trump from the start of
his tenure, with the same positive engagement, and I have met with him numerous times.

We awaited his peace initiative with utmost patience, but were shocked by decisions and actions
he undertook that completelycontradict the role and commitment ofthe United States towards the
peace process. In November 2017, his administration issued a decision to close the PLO office in
Washington, DC. He then announced his recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and
transferredhis country's embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, and boasts that he has removed the
issues of Jerusalem, refugees, settlements and security offthe negotiation table. All such decisions
threaten the Palestinian national cause and constitute an assault on international law and relevant

United Nations resolutions. The US administration went even further in its assault by cutting
assistance to the Palestinian National Authority, UNRWA and Palestinian hospitals in Occupied
East Jerusalem.

With all ofthese decisions, this administration has reneged on all previous US commitments, and
has undermined the two-State solution, and has revealed its false claims of concern about the

humanitarian conditions ofthe Palestinianpeople. It is ironicthat the American administration still
talks about what they call the "deal ofthe century". But what is left for this administration to give
to the Palestinian people? Humanitarian solutions?

And, the US Congress continues to insist on considering the Palestine Liberation Organization which is recognized as the sole, legitimate representative of the Palestinian people by the
overwhelming majority of countries of the world, including Israel - as a terrorist organization, at
a timewhen the Stateof Palestine cooperates withthe majority of countries of the world, including
the United States, to combat terrorism.

For years, we have affirmed our readiness to the US administration to establish a PalestinianAmericancommittee to examine the political and legal status ofthe FLO as a means of proving to
them that the FLO is committed to achieving peace and combating terrorism, as well as to also
demonstrate that Congress' legislation regarding the FLO is arbitrary, unlawful and unjustified
and deliberately ignores the official agreement with the US Government to combat terrorism, an
agreement we have also concluded with 83 other countries.

Despite all of this, and from this august platform, I renew my call to President Trump to rescind
his decisions and decrees regarding Jerusalem, refugees and settlements, which contravene
international law and UN resolutions, as well as the understandings among us, in order to salvage

the prospects for peaceandto achieve stability and security for the futuregenerations in our region.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Consistent with our commitment to peace and the two-state solution and the path of negotiations
to achieve them, a path we have never refused, and with a view to rescuing the peace process, I

came before the Security Council on the 20*^ of February this year and presented an initiative
calling for the convening ofan international peace conference basedon the relevant UN resolutions
and the internationally-endorsed terms of reference and parameters. Such a conference should
involve broad international participation that includes regional and international stakeholders, led
by the Permanent Members of the Security Council and the Quartet. We shall circulate this
initiative in its entirety to you and hope you will support it.
Here, I must reiterate that we are not against negotiations and have never rejected negotiations,
and that we continue to extend our hands for peace.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Peace in our region cannot be realized without an independent Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and not some place in East Jerusalem as its capital, and with all of its holy
sites. There is no peace otherwise. There is no peace with a state of temporary borders. There is
no peace with an alleged state in Gaza. The path to peace is enshrined in your resolutions, including
resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, which was adopted by an overwhelming majority and
refers to the State of Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders.

I thus call upon all the countries ofthe world that have not yet recognized the State of Palestine to
accelerate this long-overdue recognition. I can no longer see a convincing reason for the continued
delay of recognition of the State of Palestine by some countries. In this context, I wish to draw
your attention to the fact that, in 2019, the State of Palestine will chair the Group of 77, which
represents 134 States, and I urge you to support the request to enhance the State of Palestine's
status during its tenure and to allow it to exercise its fiill responsibilities on behalf of this Group.
In this regard, I wish to convey our appreciation and gratitude to Colombia for its recent

recognition ofthe State of Palestine, becoming the 139^ State to recognize our State, and likewise
to Paraguay, which had previously recognized the State of Palestine and decided to return its
embassy from Jerusalem to Tel Aviv, and I urge Guatemala to do the same.

Here, I must once again call upon the British Government - which bears a historical, political,
legal and moral responsibility with regard to the suffering and displacement of the Palestinian
people as a consequence of the Balfour Declaration of 1917 - to rectify this historic mistake by
recognizing the State of Palestine and compensating the Palestinian people for their pain and
suffering. I also call upon the United States of America, which strongly supported the Balfour
Declaration and cooperated with Great Britain to implement it, to do the same.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

I must remind you once again that Israel, the occupying Power, has not implemented any single
resolution of the hundreds of resolutions adopted by the Security Council, most recent of which
was resolution 2334 (2016), and by the General Assembly regarding the question of Palestine. Is
it acceptablethat Israel remains without accountability or consequence? Is it acceptable that Israel
remains a state above the law? Why does the Security Council not uphold its duties to compel
Israel to abide by international law and to bring an end to its occupation ofthe State of Palestine?
MadamePresident, Distinguished Representatives gathered here in this General Assembly,

We resist this colonial, settler Israeli occupation through the legitimate means created by this
international organization. Foremost among these is peaceful, popular resistance as we witness
today in the Great March ofReturn in Gaza. Wc also see it in other areas ofour occupied territory,
such as in Khan al-Ahmar, which the Israeli Government has decided to forcibly uproot and
displace its Palestinian inhabitants, who have lived there for more than 50 years, in order to

illegally impose settlement activities in that area and to sever the contiguity of the Palestinian
State.

Our Palestinian people and the territory of the State of Palestine are in more urgent need of
international protection than at any time before. Here, allow me to express our deep appreciation
and respect to the States that supported the resolution on protection for the Palestinian civilian
population, which was adopted on 13June 2018, and to urge you to find the mechanisms necessary
to provide protection as soon as possible. We also express our thanksto the Secretary-General for
his report in this regard.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Whilewe welcome all the economic and humanitarian supportto our people in the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip through the legitimate Palestinian institutions, we refuse that this support be
considered a substitute to a political solution that would bringan end to the Israeli occupation and
achieve the independence of the State of Palestine on the ground. This support also cannot be
considered an alternative to lifting the Israeli blockade and ending the division between Gaza and
the West Bank, and we will fu*mly stand against any attempts, under any pretext, to separate our
beloved Gaza from our State.

We continue to exert genuine, serious efforts to end the division and to achieve reconciliation.
Despite the many obstacles to achieving these aims, we continue to uphold our responsibilities
towards our people.

We express our appreciation to our Arab brethren, in particular the fraternal Arab Republic of
Egypt, for the efforts being undertaken to end this division, hoping that they will besuccessful.
My Government - the National Consensus Government - affirms its readiness to uphold its full
responsibilities in the Gaza Strip once it is allowed to exercise its full authority and in the
framework of one Palestinian political system, one sole legitimate authority, one law and one
legitimate weapon.
Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

After all that I have said in my statements before tliis distinguished General Assembly, let me sum
up:

•

We are not a people that can be excluded on this earth; we are an indigenous people and our
roots are deep across five thousand years. We insist on fairness towards us and the
implementation of your resolutions.

•

We have concluded agreements with Israel and they have abrogated all of them. Either Israel
abides by these agreements, or else we will renege on them. Israel will bearthe responsibility
and consequences ofthis.

•

There are also agreements with the US administration, but why have they reneged on all of
them, and how should we address this? Please answer me. Either it respects its commitments,

or we are not going to comply with any of these agreements. We will also not accept sole
American mediation in the peace process because the US administration has lost its eligibility
due to its recent decisions.

•

We have also concluded agreements withHamas. Eithertheyimplement themfully, or we will
distance ourselves from any agreements or measures that are concluded withoutour approval
and will not bear any responsibility.

•

Lastly, allow me to reaffirm to you that we will not revert to violence and terror, no matter
what the situation or conditions are.

Madame President, Ladies and Gentlemen,

I paytribute to all freedom-loving countries and peoples that continue to extend political, financial
and humanitarian assistance to our people in their struggle to bring an end to the occupation, to
strengthen our institutions in preparation for fiill independence, and in support of UNRWA.

I urge the General Assembly to ensure support to this Agency as a matter of international
responsibility. UNRWA was established by a General Assembly resolution [302(IV)] in 1949 and
was mandated to provide assistance to the Palestine refugees until the achievement of a just and
permanent solution for their plight.

In conclusion, I salute our resilient and brave people in Palestine, in the refugee camps and in the
diaspora with deepest respect and admiration for their heroic stances and their great sacrifices in
defense of our people's inalienable rights in their homeland and their rights to self-determination
and an independent State, with East Jerusalem as its eternal capital. It is inevitable that we will
achieve our freedom and independence and that we will celebrate the independence of our
democratic State despite the occupation's illusions.
I pay tribute to our honorable martyrs and courageous prisoners and say to all Palestinians that we
are soon approaching our day of freedom and independence and that the darkness of occupation
will soon vanish.

Peace and God's mercy be upon you.

Palestinian Political Initiative

First: We call for the convening of an international peace conference by mid-2018,
based on international law and the relevant UN resolutions, with broad international

participation and including the two concerned parties and the regional and
international stakeholders, foremost among them the Permanent Members of the

Security Council and the international Quartet, as was the framework for the Paris
Peace Conference and as envisaged for the conference to be convened in Moscow
as per resolution 1850 (2008). The outcomesofthis conference shouldbe as follows:
A. Acceptance ofthe State ofPalestine as a full member ofthe United Nations
and a call on the Security Council to achieve that, taking into account General
Assembly resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012, and guaranteeing international
protection for our people.
B. Mutual recognition between the State of Palestine and the State of Israel
on the basis of the 1967 borders.

C. Formation of an international multilateral mechanism that will assist the

two parties in the negotiations to resolve the permanent status issues defined in the
Oslo Accords (Jerusalem, borders, security, settlements, refugees, water and
prisoners), conduct those negotiations on the basis of international law and the
relevant UN resolutions, and implement what is to be agreed upon within a set
timeframe and with guarantees for this implementation.
Second: During the period of negotiations, all parties must refrain from unilateral
actions, particularly those that would prejudge the outcome of a final solution, as set
forth in Article 31 of the Oslo Accords of 1993. Foremost must be the cessation of

settlement activities in the territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
and suspension of the decision regarding Jerusalem and halting transfer of the US
embassy to Jerusalem, in compliance with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including in particularresolutions476 (1980), 478 (1980), 2334 (2016), and General
AssemblyresolutionES-lO/19. At the same time, the StateofPalestinewould refrain
from further joining organizations, as we have previously committed ourselves to.
(Namely 22 international organizations out of 500 organizations and treaties.)

Third: Implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative, as adopted and endorsed, and
the conclusion of a regional agreement upon achievement of a peace agreement
between the Palestinians and Israelis.

In this regard, we must reaffirm the terms ofreference for any upcoming negotiations
and they are as follows:

1. Respect for international law and the relevant resolutions, including
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) through to resolution 2334
(2016), and the Arab Peace Initiative, and the signed agreements.
2. Preservation of the principle of the two-States, i.e. the State of Palestine,
with East

Jerusalem as its capital, hving side by side with the State of Israel in peace and
security on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, and rejection of partial solutions
and a State of provisional borders.
3. Acceptance of minimal land swaps, in equal value and ratio, with the
agreement between the two parties.
4. East Jenisalem as the capital of the State of Palestine and an open city for
the faithful of the three monotheistic religions.
5. Ensuring the security of the two States without underrnining the
independence and sovereignty of either of them through the existence of an
international third party.
6. A just and agreed solution for the Palestine refugees on the basis of
resolution 194 (III) and in accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative and, pending a
just solution, continuation ofthe international commitment and support to UNRWA.

