PAPUA NEW GUINEA COUNTRY STATEMENT

HON. RIMBINK PATO, OBE, MP
SPECIAL ENVOY OF THE PRIME MINISTER
AND MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE
AT THE

GENERAL DEBATE OF THE SEVENTY-THIRDSESSION

OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK
29 SEPTEMBER2018

"Check against delivery"

Your Excellency Madam Maria Fernanda Garces, President of the
General Assembly;
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations;

Excellency's and distinguished delegates.

Today, I am pleased to, address the General Assembly on behalf of my
Prime Minister, the Honourable Peter O'Neill, and the Government and
people of Papua New Guinea,
Madam President,

I congratulate you and the Government and people of the Republic of
Ecuador, on your election as the first woman leaderfrom the Latin

American and the Caribbean region to preside over this august
Assembly.

You can count on Papua New Guinea as a committed partner to
support your work during your Presidency.

I would also like to thank the outgoing President Miroslav Lajcak for his
excellent work this past year.

It is also important to commend the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral for reform of the United Nations and its systems, the UN being
an organisation that is so fundamental to the peace, prosperity and
security of the world.

Madam President,

This is an exciting year for Papua New Guinea as we host the Asia
Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum known as APEC.

By doing so, our country is emerging on to the global stage like never
before.

Your Excellency Madam Maria Fernanda Garces, President of the
General Assembly;
Mr. Secretary-General of the United Nations;

Excellency's and distinguished delegates.

Today, I am pleased to, address the General Assembly on behalf of my
Prime Minister, the Honourable Peter O'Neill, and the Government and

people of Papua New Guinea,
Madam President,

I congratulate you and the Government and people of the Republic of
Ecuador, on your election as the first woman leaderfrom the Latin
American and the Caribbean region to preside over this august
Assembly.

You can count on Papua New Guinea as a committed partner to
support your work during your Presidency.

I would also like to thank the outgoing President Miroslav Lajcak for his
excellent work this past year.

It is also important to commend the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral for reform of the United Nations and its systems, the UN being
an organisation that is so fundamental to the peace, prosperity and
security of the world.
Madam President,

This is an exciting year for Papua New Guinea as we host the Asia
Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum known as APEC.

By doing so, our country is emerging on to the global stage like never
before.

Located in the Pacific Ocean, we are part of a vast Blue Continent of
island nations linked by sea.

We also border with Southeast Asia and are within sight of Australia.

We have more than eight million people, the biggest economy and the
largest land mass of the Pacific island countries.

We are joining with our Pacific sisters and brothers in a mighty regional

endeavour to protect the ocean and its bounty, and to bring prosperity
to our peoples.

Nations near and far are learning that our country, Papua New Guinea,
is a great treasury of riches.
We have the third biggest rainforest in the world after Brazil and the

Congo. We are guardians of a third of the global supply of tuna, the fish
that feeds the world.

Our land is home to vast storehouses of gold, silver, nickel, oil and gas.
We are one people forged together from more than 1000 tribes. With

more than 800 distinct languages we are the most linguistically diverse
nation on earth.

Yes, we have issues that all developing countries face but we are not
letting them daunt us as we strive for progress and prosperity.
This year, we are taking a giant stride as we host the Asia Pacific
Economic Cooperation Forum.

The APEC economies encompass 39 per cent of the world's population
a nd 48 per cent of the world's trade. It.involves the United States, the
People's Republic of China, Japan as well as other significant
economies.

APEC itself is, in many ways, a regional example of attempts to achieve
what all the members of the United Nations are working so hard to
accomplish.

Many issues are on the table either formally or in informal meetings on
the sidelines:

1. Prosperity through free trade- the founding rationale for APEC
Plus

2. Cleaning up and protecting the natural environment;

3. Inclusiveness so that none of our precious human beings are left
behind;

4. Embracing the digital economy;

5. And— very importantly, gender equality.
International trade is an important engine for inclusive economic
growth and poverty eradication as well as a critical source to finance
development and achieving sustainable development.

As APEC host we have opportunities like never before.
It is the largest international event in our country's history.
We are well prepared for the Leaders' Summit in mid-November 2018,

and the world will see the stunning APEC Haus, an outstanding
architectural creation inspired by local culture.
We thank all APEC member economies for their material

organisational support, and particularly
1. Australia
2.Canada

and

3. China.

4. Indonesia

5.Japan
6.New Zealand

7. Singapore
8. South Korea

and 9. the United States, and others too many to mention
To add to the Pacific island flavour of the event, we have invited Pacific

Island leaders to come to our country during this time.
Through APEC we have opportunities to attract trade and direct foreign
investment. It will continue to provide us with access to the knowledge
and experience of leading economies and to have dialogue with APEC
economy leaders in attendance.

This capacity building support in our country will lead directly to
business growth and the creation of more jobs for our people.
However-given our small and open economy which is subject to
external forces —we join in the calls for the respect for and

strengthened rules-based, multilateral trading system.
Hosting this event is a huge challenge for a developing country such as
ours.

But, Madam President, people can sometimes paralyse themselves by
focusing only on their perceived shortfalls or thdr problems.
But we decided to give it a go.
This also applies to our view of the United Nations and its work.

Of course we must acknowledge and work to eliminate the great
problems we are confronting.

But when doing so, let us all keep our eyes on the prize, our vision of
peace, security, a return to a pristine environment, and an ongoing
prosperity.

The key to overcoming these varied challenges lies in "We the peoples
of the United Nations".

Let us work on being united, being stronger together, in a system
based on mutual respect, friendship, dialogue and multilateralism.
Unity is the answer. It is the greatest power on the planet.
Madam President,

Two weeks ago, Papua New Guinea celebrated her Forty-third
Anniversary of Independence as an unbroken democracy.
We continue to consolidate our economic and structural reforms

supported by responsible monetary and fiscal policies aimed at a
balanced budget.

With recovering global oil and gas prices and several new major energy
and mining projects well advanced, we are optimistic about our future
economic outlook.

Madam President,

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a solid pathway that
holds much promise for the international community. The choice to
enjoy its full potential lies in our hands.

At the Pacific regional level, earlier this month in Nauru, our Forum
leaders reaffirmed our collective commitment. The call for collective

action is in the Boe Declaration, a copy of which was delivered by
5

Pacific leaders to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
yesterday.

At the national level, we recognise the importance of putting in place
the basic building blocks needed to enable successful, inclusive and
participatory sustainable development.

Both Australia and New Zealand, our good friends, have eloquently
addressed this august Assembly on issues facing our region and the
world, and the requirements and obligations for collective action.
Madam President,

An essential part of our development challenge is harnessing the vastly
untapped potential of our increasing youth population, which today
constitute almost 60 percent of our population.
Creating employment opportunities in both the formal and informal

sectors is a key priority to address the needs of our youth in the
country.We have hopes for the transformative nature of the digital
economy, which is a game changer.

In addition, one of our greatest challenges is to protect women and
girls, to ensure they have full equality in our society. This is a
fundamental human right. We have a long way to go in this area.

We are determined to find ways to progress for the women and girls
themselves and for the good of the nation.

In fact, our long term advancement depends on great improvements in
this one crucial area.

We are working hard to do this via policies and laws, combating
gender-based violence, providing business opportunities in the formal
and informal sectors such as micro-credit schemes and investing in our
girls and women's education at all levels of our education system. The
6

changes are noticeable as we have put in an additional one million
more young people to schools, and in particular, girls.
We express our gratitude for the support of our muitilaterai and

bilateral development partners, including the United Nations system in
assisting in more ways than one to achieve our goais.
Madam President,

We are preparing our people to cope with the increasing dangers
arising out climate, which are reai for us.
Earlier this month, as I have said, at the Pacific Isiand Leaders forum in

Nauru, we reaffirmed our strong commitment to work together combat
the adverse impacts of climate change under the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement and through
other Frameworks for the Resilient Deveiopment of the Pacific region.
The Boe Communique of the Pacific Leaders' Forum put our position
beyond doubt.

We therefore strongly welcome the Secretary-General's Climate
Summit in September 2019.
Madam President,

In February this year, Papua New Guinea experienced a tragic and
unprecedented earthquake, the worst in our history.

it hit five of our provinces, killed nearly 200 people, and displaced
nearly six hundred thousand others. Many others were injured and
traumatised. Vital infrastructure was destroyed. The nationai economy
slowed. Compounding our situation were two separate voicanic
eruptions.

We sympathise with such other countries as indonesia, Japan, the
Phiiippines, China and the United States,

the countries of the

Caribbean and others who have been affected in recent months by
natural disasters and climate change induced challenges.
We express our gratitude to our bilateral and multilateral development
partners, including the UN system, Australia, New Zealand, China,
Japan, and others, as well as the private sector and civil society
groups, who stood with us in our time of need. We are revamping our
disaster-related plans.
Madam President,

We welcome efforts to replenish climate finance in the Green Climate

Fund and thank the contributors for your generosity.

Improved access and in a timely manner is imperative, especially for
small island developing countries, like ours to benefit from this

important support to help us to mitigate, adapt and build resilience to
the ravages of climate change adverse impacts and natural disasters.
Again this is a call for collective global action that all Small Island
Developing States seek.
Madam President,

Our Government notes the increasing interest from the international

community on the imminent Referendum in Papua New Guinea's
Autonomous Region of Bougainville in June 2019, under the
Bougainville Peace Agreement.
We are fully committed to the Agreement.
We have appointed, this year, the former Irish Prime Minister Mr.
Bertie Ahern to preside over the work of the BougainviTle ReferendunT
Commission. We are keen for the Commission to begin its mandate
soon.

We are grateful to our multilateral and bilateral development partners
Including the United Nations, for working together with us on this
important national issue.

We want to emphasise that the work of this partnership should in no

way undermine the sovereignty of Papua New Guinea over its territory,
in accordance with international law.

Madam President,

We welcome the easing of tensions in the Korean Peninsula and

commend efforts made by all parties involved and further encourage
peaceful dialogue.

We support the moves to keep sanctions in place, not as a punishment,
but as a real incentive to get rid of nuclear weapons to implement fully
all UN Security Council resolutions and to bring prosperity to the
peoples of the DPRK.

We applaud and support in that respect, the efforts of the President of
the General Assembly to draw global attention to the dangers of the
Weapons of Mass Destruction. For our part, we are working towards
signing the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.
Madam President,

Let me take this opportunity to share with this Assembly the current

status of the refugees and migrants on our Manus Island.
The processing centre was officially closed by my Government on 31

October 2017 following the decision of our Supreme Court in April
2016.

We are therefore working closely with Australia in resettling qualified
asylum seekers, including in the US. Other migrants still remain in
Papua New Guinea. Each will be addressed case-by-case.
9

That is our contribution to the extent possible, in partnership with

Australia, to address human trafficking, people smuggling and
transnational crime.

Madam President,

As a maritime nation, the oceans agenda continues to be of great

importance to us as it contributes significantly to our nation's
wellbeing.

We are working to ensure fair and equitable returns from our marine
resources, particularly in combating illegal, unregulated and unreported
fishing in Papua New Guinea's territorial waters.

We are grateful or the close cooperation of likeminded countries in
WTO who are working

to address harmful fisheries subsidies that

foster lUU fishing.
At the Pacific Islands Forum, under our Blue Pacific Continent theme,
we have agreed to:

* secure the region's maritime boundaries
* to work to eliminate marine litter

* to enhance maritime surveillance to deter illicit activities.

Madam President,

As I conclude I want to draw your attention once again to our country
as we prepare to host the APEC leaders' summit.

As the world increasingly turns its attention to the Pacific Ocean, we
are witnessing the enhanced iriferest of a range of cOuhtfies, sucTT as

Australia, China, France, New Zealand the United Kingdom and the
United States.

10

As one of the nations of the Blue Pacific continent, we welcome that
interest.

However, we urge ail to play an appropriate role according to the
accepted rules of the international order, so that the Pacific Ocean will

be a zone of cooperation, of stability and security, of pristine beauty
and prosperity.

And may I conclude. Madam President, by expressing the fervent hope
of ail our peoples that the Pacific Ocean forever lives up to its name—
the Ocean of Peace.

i thank you. Madam President.

11

