Speech of the President of the Republic of Poland
Mr. Andrzej Duda
at the general debate during the 73rd Session
of the UN General Assembly
Topic of the debate: Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global
leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies
New York, September 26, 2018

Distinguished Madam President,
Excellencies,
Esteemed Delegates,

I congratulate Ms. María Fernanda Espinosa Garcés, the President
of the 73rd Session of the UN General Assembly, on her election to
this honourable function. I wish to assure you, Madam President,
about Poland`s full support for the measures you will take. At the
same time, I wish to express my gratitude to Mr. Miroslav Lajčák
for his active chairmanship over the 72nd Session of the UN General
Assembly.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

This

year

Poles

celebrate

the

centenary

of

regaining

independence. In 1918, after 123 years of bondage, Poland
returned to the map of Europe. The restoration of an independent,
free and sovereign state became a reality mainly due to three
factors: the desire of the Polish nation to have its own state,
1

the

heroic

sacrifice

of

the

battling

soldiers,

and

the

determination of courageous leaders, who convinced politicians
across the world that without a restored Poland, Europe would not
be just and safe. Both then and today, the will of the nations and
of the political leaders remains crucial. Both then and today,
Europe will not be just and safe without sovereign Poland.

Each September the Heads of State meet here, in New York, to
engage in an in-depth reflection on the most crucial issues affecting
our globe. Hence, it is us with whom a particular responsibility lies.
It is us who are rightly expected to be courageous and
active, able to rise above divisions, determined in our search
for solutions to the most pressing issues of the contemporary
world.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

The modern world is full of threats. We are witnessing a very
dynamic development of the international situation. There are
reasons to be hopeful, such as a potential change in the situation
on the Korean Peninsula and the ongoing de-escalation of tensions
there. But there are also problems that persist and remain
unresolved. In order to sort them out, we undoubtedly need the
cooperation of as many countries as possible today. To make it
effective, two conditions need to be met.

2

Firstly, we must all comply with the international law, which was
the main theme of the Polish Presidency of the Security Council in
May this year. I had the privilege of holding a high-level open
debate at that time, the conclusions of which were that only 1)
cooperation among countries within the rule-based global
order will provide an opportunity to resolve frozen conflicts and
prevent us from the emergence of new ones, 2) the rule-based
global order requires strong

institutions to enforce the

international law and 3) no violation of the law can be justified
or distorted by a whole range of language definitions.

Today the map of the world is full of flashpoints. As part of the rulebased global order that we are promoting, I would like to draw your
attention to one fundamental principle that will be our priority
throughout the second year of Poland's membership of the Security
Council. I am thinking of the sovereign equality of states, as
referred to in Article 2 of the United Nations Charter.

If we want to be the advocates of multilateralism, and the UN
is, after all, its source, we must bear this principle in mind. In other
words, not everyone who claims to be a proponent of
multilateralism thinks of it in terms of the equality of states.
One can say that there is a negative multilateralism, which boils
down to the concert of powers, a division into spheres of influence
and the conviction that the fate of others can be decided without
their participation. Europe and Poland were often victims of

3

this kind of multilateralism, starting from the 18th century,
throughout the 19th century, to the times of the Cold War.

Multilateralism and the rule-based global order are there not just
for the chosen ones. The same principles must apply to all and
to the same extent. Everyone has equal rights and proportional
obligations. This is how I define the positive multilateralism,
which Poland stands for. The multilateralism of equal states
and free nations, not the multilateralism of usurpation and
hierarchy. We are committed to relations in which every state
enjoys equal rights. This however does not imply a naive perception
of the world, a world devoid of differences among states. What it
means is that the states which have an advantage, in terms of
potential and power, should not deprive others of their equal
right to independence and subjectivity. Only with such equality
ensured, are we able to fully use the potential of states for the
common good and according to the rule of fair play. This applies
both to political and economic relations, since only if the principle of
the equality of states is respected, are we able to talk about the
exchange of interests and real alliances.

However, the concept of the positive multilateralism, which Poland
subscribes to, goes one step further. It claims that, wherever
possible, weaker countries should be given additional opportunities
to make an impact, in order to make the equal rights of states
more realistic. Such opportunities can encompass an additional
voting power, or an additional territorial representation in the
4

decision-making bodies. To me as President of the Republic of
Poland, two areas of application of this principle are
particularly close:
1) the awaited reform of the Security Council, which we
support, and want to participate in, and which should include
among its leading themes: expanding the field of equal rights and
competences of all Council members;
2) a reform of the European Union as returning to its origins,
which emerged from the concept of positive multilateralism, and
which today are repeatedly violated.

Next year Poland will organize a series of initiatives centred around
the idea of sovereign equality. The aim of that effort is to win over
as many supporters of our vision as possible.

Secondly, it is important that multilateralism serves a
certain system of values, instead of being just an element of a
political technology and a game of interests. Such system of values
is reflected in the Charter of the United Nations. Negative
multilateralism, which contravenes these values, may only result in
the exacerbation of global problems. On the other hand, a
voluntary cooperation of states, equal in their rights, can bring
lasting peace to Europe and the world. Every time a temptation
of a concert of powers is born, the global stability is
undermined.
contributes

Whoever
to

the

promotes

disintegration

negative

multilateralism

of

global

the

order.

Multilateralism is meant to be a commitment to respect for
5

values, especially the fundamental ones, such as respect for
human dignity and life. It is about the values which go beyond the
political order and are not politically defined, for they are the
foundation of the global political order.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

International relations do not serve states only, they serve the
entire humanity. Therefore, sovereignty of a state should be
fundamentally linked to responsibility for the respect of
norms which are common for the good of us all. Every
violation of the norms must bear consequences. Wherever leaders
might infringe fundamental human rights, use tortures, persecute
their political opponents or use weapons of mass destruction, the
international community, including the Security Council, should
respond swiftly and decisively.

Being a nation with a unique experience of a peaceful democratic
transformation and a struggle for fundamental freedoms, Poland
attaches particular importance to protection and promotion
of

human

rights,

as

exemplified,

among

others,

by

my

country`s bid for membership in the UN Human Rights
Council, for the 2020-2022 term. Our potential membership in
this body, unique for the global human rights protection system,
will complement, in a natural way, our current membership in the
Security Council, in accordance with the fundamental UN triad of
peace and security, human rights and development.
6

Ladies and Gentlemen,

The UN Charter endows the Organization, and especially its
Security Council, with special responsibility for matters pertaining
to peace and international security. As a non-permanent member of
the Security Council we deem this task to be of crucial importance.

Poland actively supports all actions and initiatives aimed at
preventing

the use and proliferation of weapons of mass

destruction and their means of delivery, as well as bringing the
perpetrators using such weapons to justice.

I wish to announce that Poland intends to return to an active
participation in the UN peace-keeping missions. We have
submitted a formal application to the Secretariat in this regard and
are looking forward to its positive evaluation. Given our experience
in this field, extending over many years, we are convinced that it
will positively contribute to the peaceful resolution of conflicts.

Poland is involved in the process of stabilization and building of
lasting security on the Korean Peninsula, not only now, in its
capacity as non-permanent member of the UN Security Council, but
also as a member of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission in
Korea. I am convinced that the NNSC experience could potentially
be applied while establishing foundations for peace and stability on
the Peninsula.
7

Given its extensive experience accumulated during the period of
political transformation, Poland stands ready to get actively
engaged in the international peace rebuilding and consolidation
programmes in the Middle East. In all the places where, after the
end of conflicts, it is necessary to restore stability and provide
development opportunities.

At the same time, Poland regards it as its duty to draw the
attention of the international community to the sources of threats
to world peace resulting from frozen conflicts, occupation
and shifting of borders by force, which is happening in
Eastern Europe. International community must not allow a return
to “business as usual”, and the actions of the aggressors should be
confronted with a relevant response.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

This December Poland will have an honour to host the 24th session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 24), in the
city of Katowice. The primary goal of the meeting is to finalize
works on the provisions implementing the Paris Agreement.
A complete and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement is
inextricably connected with the attainment of the UN sustainable
development goals. Therefore, the global climate action should
8

bring together the economic, social and environmental dimensions,
while at the same time, be conducive to stopping the global
warming and eradicating the most serious problems of the modern
world.

The implementation package, planned to be adopted in Katowice,
provides an essential basis for action to be taken by state entities
and NGOs, including international financial institutions, the private
sector, local authorities and civil society organizations. Only
provisions applicable in the long-term and accepted by all actors,
are

able

to

guarantee

and sustainability of rules,
implementation

of

the

transparency,

legal

security,

which is indispensable for the

adopted

obligations

and

for

the

strengthening of global ambitions.

COP 24 will be launched with the Leaders` Summit, which is
scheduled for December 3rd and 4th, and offers an excellent
opportunity to express our common and responsible political will. It
will also send a clear messege to the world that the efforts we
make are aimed at securing a safe future. Once again, I wish to
invite you to attend the Katowice summit and ensure a highturn out for the event.

9

Ladies and Gentlemen,

The centenary of Poland regaining independence makes us reflect
on the fate of the world, Europe and on my country`s difficult road
to freedom. Simultaneously, it is a reason to look into the future
and an inspiration to sensibly shape our common, international
reality based on historical experiences, values and aspirations.
I encourage all member states to work even closer together
on the initiatives aimed at achieving the objectives which
guide the United Nations Organization. Only the decisions
taken jointly by political leaders are able to address challenges
faced by the globalized world.
Poland subscribes to the view that our common future requires a
strong and effective international community, which will better
accommodate the needs of humanity. This however is going to
depend mainly on us, since the United Nations Organization is not
an abstract entity, it is the common achievement of us all. It is up
to us how effective we will be in using it for the sake of building
peace, ensuring justice and sustainable development, in other
words: building a better world, worthy of the 21st century – for us,
but first and foremost, for the future generations.

Thank you very much for your attention.

10

