PORTUGAL

Address by His Excellency the President of the Portuguese Republic
United Nations Ge eral ssembly

New York, 26 September 2018

Madam President
Mr. Secretary-General,

adam President, Maria Fernanda Esp nosa,
Very special congratulations on your election.
Because of your personality and career. Because of the priorities you have defined.
Because of the progress you represent in gender equality at the United Nations.
Because of the previous informal interactive dialogue, a sign of increased
transparency of the General Assembly.
Mr. Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres,

Equal congratulation and continued support to all the priorities you have pursued
and all the actions you have developed during your lucid and dynamic mandate.
Multilateralism, based on international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
the reform of the United ations System, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and the
maintenance of peace, concern about migration and refugees, combating terrorism
and international crime, the oceans and maritime security, climate change, the

Agenda 2030, gender equality and support to young people.
All directed towards the permanent u holding of human rights.
Strengthened multilateralism, always.
For this reason, we do not understand, rather we deplore, unilateral tropism and
disinvestment in international organisations. They represent a political short¬
sightedness, which runs the risk of repeating the mistakes of almost a century ago.
The reform of the United Nations requires the commitment of all Member States.
Mainta ning the status quo is a way of gutting multilateralism and multiplying risks,
conflicts without prevention, underdevelopment and the violation of human rights
and human dignity.
Not reforming the Security Council with a broad-based consensus is to ignore the
geopolitics of the 21st century, which requires, at the very least, the presence of the
African continent, Brazil and India.

Preventing conflicts and maintaining peace in peacekeeping and institutional capacity
building operations, as Portugal is doing in nine United Nations operations; six of
them in Africa, I would especially mention our presence in MINUSCA and in
MINUSMA, in the Multinational Rotation Contribution.
Migration and refugees, which involves understanding the causes of gro ing human
mobility, the need for d alogue between societ es of origin, transit and destination,
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Re ular Migration and the Global
Compact for Refugees", and promotion of the right to education in emergency
situations.

Portugal unreser edly supports these "Pacts", it accepts and will continue to accept
migrants, refugees and other displaced persons. It launched - under former
President Jorge Sampaio - the Global Platform for Syrian Students" and calls for
wider involvement in the Rapid Response Mechanism for Higher Education".
The fight aga nst terrorism, which has led to the creation of the UN Office of
Counter-Terrorism , the "lst Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies ,

and the sixth revision of the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy".
The guarantee of justice for victims of serious international crimes through the
International Criminal Court, which began to consider the crime of aggression in 2017
- a step in which Portugal played an active role - and is expected to move towards
universal adoption with the accession of more Member States.
Oceans and maritime security, meaning multilateralism and international law.

Portugal is actively involved in the preparations for the "Second United Nat ons
Oceans Conference" in 2020, and stands ready to assume all the responsibilities that
are in olved in its organisation.
Maritime security in places such as the coasts of Somalia or the Gulf of Guinea,
where Portugal is present in the EUNAVFOR Atalanta operation within the
framework of the European Union, and in the Yaounde process alongside the African
•Union and countries in the region. And we are going further, creating in the Azores a

Centre for the Defence of the Ocean, a platform for the different international
organ sations.

Global governance of the oceans, with the United Nations Framewor Convention
on Climate Change" and the "Global Compact for the Environment".
For us, these are structural issues which we do not change to suit short-term trends
and players - we regard the right to a healthy environment as a fundamental right.

we support carbon neutrality by 2050, and with Lebanon e are jointly chairing the
Working Party on the Global Compact for the Environment .
Basically, there are two different views of the world.
One, short-term, is unilateral or minilateral, protectionist, with domestic populist
discourse, minimising mult lateralism in anything to do with sustainable
development, prone to climate change denial, opposed to Global Pacts on
migration and refugees, only interested in conflict prevention and peacekeeping
where and when, occasionally, it matters to it, and matters more in terms of

economic rather than political power.
The other, opposing, view, which we share, is ultilateral, open, and favourable to
the search for global governance, committed to sustainable development, regarding
international law, the Charter and human rights as values and principles, never as
means or conveniences.

And e are confident that, in the medium to longterm, this view will prevail, as it has
prevailed in the European Union, which has given Europe the longest period of peace
in living memory and the highest levels of welfare and social protection.
And also the 70th Anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Law Commission. This is the appropriate time to call for consensus on
the adoption of the biennial resolution on The moratorium on the death penalty",
which is to be submitted to this General Assembly.
Mada President,
Mr. Secretary-General,

Our view of the world situation and of the role of the United Nations - which, as I
said, is in complete agreement ith that of the Secretary-General explains our
positions on so-called regional questions, but which are global in scope. Let me now
dwell on some that are of special relevance to Portugal.
The strengthening of the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries, currently
presided by Cabo Verde, to be followed by Angola, whose contributions to stability
and development I wish to highlight. The CPLP enjoys magnificent cooperation with
the UN and pursues.the goal of seeing the Portuguese language - one of the most
widely spoken in the world - adopted as an official language of the United Nations.
The steps taken in Guinea-Bissau in preparation for elections in November.

The growing importance of the African Union its key uniting role for peace and
sustainable development, the intensification of the partnership with the United
Nations and the historic step of the Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship
between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Our wish that the elections in the Democratic Republic
of Congo ill be held in a safe, free and fair manner and that the results will be
respected by all.
The important developments on the Korean Peninsula opening up positive prospects
for complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearisation and demonstrating the
commitment and courage of the parties involved and the contribution of the regional
partners of the United Nations and of diplomacy for world peace and security.
The signing of the Maritime Boundary Treaty between Australia and Timor-Leste
under the auspices of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, confirming the
effect veness of the peaceful settlement of disputes through conciliation under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea".
Unfortunately, certain parts of the Middle East and the Maghreb continue to show
signs of permanent political, social and economic instability.
In Libya the international community must unite to assist with the humanitarian and
security situation and the creation of a solid State.
Yemen remains the scene of one of the greatest humanitarian crises today, affecting
especially the most vulnerable, women and children. Only negotiated political
solutions, through the mediation of the Unite Nations and respect for international
humanitarian law, will be able to reverse this increasingly tragic situation.
Equally tragic is the humanitarian crisis in Syria, with one of the largest flows of
refugees within and out of the region.
Here also, only a substantive, inclusive and UN-mediated political solution will tend
to ensure effective and broad-based international support for reconstruction, in the
absence of which there will be apparent, sporadic and transitory agreements, but not
the lasting peace.
In any case, stabilisation and peace in the Middle East will only be possible with the
resolution of the Israeli-Paiestinian conflict.
Common sense demands the resumption of a credible negotiation process,
addressing all the final status issues, including the question of Jerusalem, and leading
to a practicable two-state solution based on coexistence by Israel and Palestine in
peace and security.

Madam President,
Mr. Secretary-General,

As mentioned yesterday by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, true patriotism is
only complete with cosmopolitanism.
Portugal believes that mult lateral action, political dialogue and diplomatic wisdom
are the only possible route to harmonious coexistence between nations and peoples.
And that a very short-term vie or iews, ho e er appealing they may appear to be,
are just a flash in the pan, which does not last, will not last, and will not solve the
world s true problems: development, justice, security and effective respect for the
rights of those who are the reason for our mandate and our presence in this General
Assembly.

As Nelson Mandela said: A fundamental concern for others in our indi dual and
community lives would go a long way in making the world the better place we so
passionately dreamt of . This is the noble mission of this Institution; it is also the
reason for Portugal s deep commitment to the United Nations.
Thank you.

