REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA

STATEMENT
By
H.E. Mr. Pavel FILIP

PRIME MINISTER
OF THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA

AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE
SEVENTY-THIRD SESSION OF THE
UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York, 28 September 2018

Check against delivery
Madame President,
Mister Secretary-General,
Excellencies,

Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to begin by congratulating H.E. Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa on her
election as President of the seventy-third session of the UN General Assembly and to
wish her success in fulfilling her important mandate.
Furthermore, I would like to thank H.E. Mr. Miroslav Lajcak for the fruitful activity in
his capacity as President of the General Assembly during the previous session and to
wish him success in his future endeavors.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the former UN Secretary-General, H.E. Mr.
Kofi Annan, a true leader and promoter of UN values, who will remain in the memory
of this or anization as one of the most distinguished and dedicated supporters of
humanitarianism and global peace.
Madame President,
For more than 70 years, the United Nations is the center of multilateral diplomacy,
playing a primary role in global processes, from international peace and security to the
promotion human rights and sustainable development.
While the international environment is continually evolving and transforming, now it is
a crucial moment requiring the adaptation of the United Nations to face the challenges
of the modern world. Hence, we welcome the initiatives of the Secretary-General,
Antonio Guterres, which he launched since the first day of his taking office.
In particular, we welcome the reform to enhance the performance of the UN Secretariat

in the field of inte ational peace and security by highlighting conflict prevention as a
top riority.
Furthermore, we support the efforts for the management reform, through the
optimization of functions and increasing the accountability of all the branches of the
Secretariat in the fulfillment of their mandate.
Finally, of particular importance is the recent decision on the repositioning of the UN
development system, by enabling it to effectively contribute to the implementation of
Sustainable Development Goals agreed three years ago.
Undoubtedly, these initiatives are very complex and will carry systemic changes across
the entire organization. To ensure that these reforms yield the expected results in a
medium and long term perspective, the transparent and constructive dialogue between
UN management and Member States will have to be sustained.

2

Madame President,
The implementation of Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development is definitely a
milestone in the work of the organization for the years to come. The reform of the UN
development system comes at a time when the implementation of this agenda is to be
accelerated at all levels, in a joint effort of the UN system and the Member States.
We welcome the new reform vision by which the private sector will be more actively
involved in achieving sustainable development at global, regional and national levels.
This partnership has the potential to provide a new impetus for progress and
innovation, including for financial mobilization, to make up for the gaps in finances
that the organization is currently facing.
In view of the Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Government of the Republic
of Moldova has elaborated, through an inclusive and participatory process, a vision of
a new development strategy called „Moldova 2030 , fully aligned with its international
commitments, including the Moldova-EU Association A reement.
This new development strategy highlights the wellbeing and human rights,
environment protection as well as cultivating an inclusive society as its top priorities.
There are several ongoing projects aimed at materializing these objectives.
We are currently implementing an ambitious national program to rehabilitate the road
infrastructure across the country, to improve the connectivity and mobility of people,
goods and services.

We are introducing more profoundly innovation and technology in the sphere of public
services for more accessibility, better quality, and transparency as well as for the
elimination of corruption.
We have managed to take an important step forward towards the integration of the
Republic of Moldova into the European energy market by signing an agreement with the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development for the financing of the biggest
energy project of the Republic of Moldova since its independence. The country s energy
independence is crucial for its sustainable development and social stability.
We work actively with our international partners including UN agencies and programmes
in the area of the enviromnent, to continually develop renewable energy and reduce gas
emissions in accordance with our international commitments.

Given the complexity of Agenda 2030, there are certainly several other initiatives which
we pursue as part of our comprehensive sustainable development vision which we
implement in line with this new integrative approach, in partnership with the United
Nations and our partners.

3

Madame President,
While in the field of development the United Nations has managed to establish a
reform vision endorsed by the General Assembly resolution last May, in the sphere of
security, where the political factor is more predominant, deficiencies still persist.
The efficiency and relevance of the United Nations in this area can not be fully
achieved only through internal restructuring of its Secretariat.
Delaying the reform of the Security Council in the last 25 years does not contribute to
the respect for the UN Charter, the International Law and the maintenance of
international peace and security, which are the core prerogatives of this organization.
We follow with great concern the violent conflicts in various parts of the world, with
severe consequences for civilian population. The inability of the Security Council to
take effective measures in these situations raises a legitimate question about its
relevance as a decisional body for international security. From this perspective, the
reform is key to restore the relevance and authority of the Security Council and, by
extension, of the entire United Nations, in matters of international peace and security.
The Republic of Moldova supports the vision of an efficient, representative,
democratic and inclusive Security Council, able to swiftly respond to complex security
challenges. Furthermore, as we declared several times in the past, we stand for the
allocation of an additional non-permanent seat for the Eastern European group of
countries. And we hope that the membership of this Assembly could come to an
agreement on outstanding reform issues sooner rather than later.

Distinguished dele ates,
The UN Charter requires our organization to play a proactive role in maintaining the
international peace and security and in ensuring the respect for Member States
sovereignty and territorial integrity.
By bringing before the UN General Assembly matters arising from challenges to their
sovereignty, territorial integrity and national security, the Member States do not seek
confrontation or politicization in the work General Assembly.
It is only natural for such States to turn to UN for assistance in promoting and
encouraging solutions based on the strict observance of the International Law and UN
Charter.

During the High Level Segment of the last session I reiterated, from this high-rostrum,
the calls to the United Nations to focus meaningfully on a grave breach of the
International Law and UN Charter, namely the continued presence of the Russian
military forces and armaments on the territory of the Republic of Moldova, without its
consent and against its express wish.

4

I also appealed to the Member States to support the inclusion in the agenda of General
Assembly of an item focused on this pressing security, olitical, legal and security issue
faced by the Republic of Moldova.
I am pleased to note that the General Assembly adopted a resolution which declared
straightforwardly that the Russian Federation s continued refusal to withdraw its military
forces and armaments from the Moldovan soil, unless some political preconditions of
domestic nature are met by the Republic of Moldova, is incompatible with the rules of
International Law and the UN Charter.
By adopting on 22 June 2018 the resolution A/72/282, the UN General Assembly has also
unequivocally stressed that the Russian Federation’s non-compliance with the
Inte ational Law and UN Charter has lead to clear violation of sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova and, subsequently, it must withdraw its military
forces unconditionally, completely and with no further delay.
The resolution is the first important milestone for consolidating the support of the United
Nations for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova. In this
context, I would like to express deep gratitude to all Member States which co-sponsored
the resolution or supported its adoption.
Last week, the General Committee and, subsequently, the General Assembly decided, by
consensus, to include in the agenda of seventy-third session a new item, entitled The
withdrawal of foreign military forces from the territory of the Republic of Moldova.
The Government of the Republic of Moldova welcomes this important decision which
comes at a time hen the internal and sub-regional security has worsened due to repeated,
unlawful and destabilising activities of the foreign military forces and the unconstitutional
power structures in the eastern part of the country.

The joint military exercises of the Operational Group of Russian Forces, stationed
illegally on Moldovan soil, with the paramilitaries of the unconstitutional power
structures, which have increased in scope and frequency, represent a continued violation
of the 1992 Moldovan-Russian Ceasefire Agreement that contains a explicit legal binding
commitment of the Russian Federation to ensure the neutrality of Russian military
Forces during the process of their withdrawal from the territory of the Republic of
Moldova.

Aiming at upgrading the military offensive capacity of unconstitutional power structures,
the illegal joint military exercises undermine international efforts aimed at the peaceful
resolution of the protracted Transnistrian problem.
The Republic of Moldova, echoed by other OSCE Member States, repeatedly expressed
its deep concern with regard to these unlawful and continual destabilising exercices that
run contrary to the obligations of the Russian Federation in the framework of the “5+2
international settlement format.

5

From this high rostrum today, we appeal once again to the Russian Federation to
discontinue these illegal and provocative activities and to resume unconditionally and
without further delay the process of the withdrawal of its troops and armaments, in
accordance with its legal commitments under 1999 Istanbul Summit Outcome Document
and in observance of its obligations under the International Law and the UN Charter.
Distinguished delegates,
he complete and unconditional withdrawal of the foreign military forces from the
territory of the Republic of Moldova will, undoubtedly, facilitate the settlement process of
the transnistrian conflict and the reintegration of the country.
Despite the many difficulties encountered along the settlement process, the Moldovan
authorities are determined to find, within the „5+2 negotiating format, a political solution
to this protracted conflict, externally generated, in the easte

part of the Republic of

Moldova.
For us, it is extremely important that this solution is based on full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova, providing a special status
for the transnistrian region, as stipulated in the relevant OSCE documents.
Madame President,
I would like to refer briefly to the goal of European integration of my country, which
guides the reform agenda of the Republic of Moldova, particularly through the
application of the Association Agreement with the European Union. By aligning the
Republic of Moldova to EU principles and standards and by harmonizing the national
legislation with the European one, we aim to bring our country closer to EU and to
ensure the sustainability of the modernization process.
The extent of our cooperation with the EU is ample. It includes several dimensions,
starting with the political, constructive and intensive dialogue, to the creation of the
free and comprehensive trade zone, inter-sectoral cooperation and taking stock of
collaboration opportunities within the Eastern Partnership.
In economic terms, the Association Agreement is a big step forward for the economy
of the Republic of Moldova, while the European Union has become the country s main
trading partner. Several positive results have been achieved in key sectors contributing
to trade facilitation, growing the competitiveness of goods and services and opening
new op ortunities for local producers.
I am convinced that the implementation of the Association Agreement is the best and
viable option to deliver prosperity and sustainable development for the Republic of
Moldova and will warrant the irreversibility of the EU integration path.

6

Distinguished dele ates,
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the commitment of my country to continually
promote the respect for UN Charter and to contribute to the achievement of
internationally agreed UN goals.
I would also like to express the hope that the initiatives recently launched towards the
consolidation of the organization s capacities will contribute to achieving better
performance in the area of development as in the area of international peace and
security.

We shall remain truthful to UN ideals and to its capacity to ensure the respect for
International Law.

I thank you.

7

