ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT PAUL KAGAME
73rd United Nations General Assembly
New York, 25 September 2018

We gather here and work together to make the United Nations
more relevant to all people. The positive developments in Africa
over the past year merit this body’s attention.
Let me start with a paradox. In no other region is the sense of
trans-national solidarity and unity so deeply felt as in Africa. The
idea that our respective national identities stand in contradiction
to Pan-Africanism is unheard of in our context.
And yet, despite this unique civic endowment, Africa has too often
stood out for division and dysfunction in practice. This left Africa
unable to articulate and advance our common interests. We
ceded responsibility for our future to others, not by force but by
default.
But times are changing rapidly, and so the management of
Africa’s global position must also change. The trend on our
continent is toward closer and more productive cooperation, both
through

the

African

Union

and

our

Regional

Economic

Communities.
The evident decline of old certainties and authorities is not
bringing turbulence to Africa, as would have been the case, as of

a previous era. On the contrary, the effect has been to focus
Africa’s attention on the urgent need to get our house in order and
fundamentally change how we do business. That is why the
African Union initiated a major financial and institutional reform,
more than three years ago.
We are already seeing practical results. New financial discipline
has produced an African Union budget that is 12 per cent lower
than last year. The share of funding supplied by Member States
has also increased substantially. Contributions to the Peace Fund,
which helps pay for African Union peace support operations, are
at the highest level since its establishment in 1993.
And earlier this year, the historic African Continental Free Trade
Area was signed, which was the culmination of decades of effort.
Once in force, Africa’s place in the global economic and trade
architecture will be redefined. Economies of scale and higher
levels of intra-African trade will help our continent attain the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. We will also see new
possibilities for public-private partnership with Africa’s growing
private sector.
This year also provided examples of regional security affairs and
key political transitions being handled in a peaceful and forwardlooking manner. More effective consultation and leadership is
reducing the need for external mediation, and this is how it should
be.

2

The momentous developments in the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia,
Eritrea, Djibouti, and even Somalia) are the most remarkable. The
region’s leaders deserve our full support, as they set aside
decades

of

mistrust

and

work

toward

a

comprehensive

settlement. It is important for the United Nations Security Council
to collaborate closely with the African Union to accompany this
process of normalisation.
In Zimbabwe as well, the next stages on the country’s path of
progress warrant steady encouragement from the international
community.
However, there are other situations in Africa, notably the Central
African Republic, Libya, the Sahel, and South Sudan, where
serious problems remain unresolved, despite so much potential.
Africa and the world should come together and do what needs to
be done to harmonise overlapping initiatives and ensure that
agreements are respected.
Peace and security are the foundation of economic and social
well-being. Yesterday, we happily marked the centenary of Nelson
Mandela’s birth with the Mandela Peace Summit.
In that spirit, we are already set to embark on a new chapter in
cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations on
the stable funding of African Union-mandated peace support
operations. The resolution set to be introduced by Africa’s three
Security Council members has the full backing of the African
Union. This step will also align with the Secretary-General’s new
3

Action for Peacekeeping Initiative. This reflects, once again, that
the dividend of a more focused and functional Africa benefits
everyone.
In this wider context of even stronger partnership between our
institutions, it is important for the African Union’s diplomatic
representation here at the United Nations to be accorded the
status and weight enjoyed by other regional bodies.
The theme for this year’s General Debate is making the United
Nations relevant to all people. This requires a commitment to
achieving real multilateralism, where it has too often been lacking.
The

current

two-track

system

of

global

governance

is

unsustainable. A few get to be the ones to define the norms by
which others shall be judged.
But standards that do not apply to everyone, equally, are not
universal. Addressing this imbalance in the very foundation of our
system is what will give shape to a revival of multilateral
cooperation and renew the legitimacy of the international
institutions that are so crucial to our planet’s future.
In the years ahead, we look forward to deepening this important
partnership between Africa and the United Nations to advance our
shared agenda of peace and security, gender equality and
women’s empowerment, environmental protection, and shared
prosperity.
I thank you very much for your kind attention.

4

