Statement y Dr. the ono r ble Timothy Harris, M.P., J.P.

Prime Minister of St Kitts and Nevis
to the Gener l Debate of the
73rd Session of the U ited Nations General Assembly
New York, September 28, 2018

Making the United Nations Relevant to All People: Global Leadership and
Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies

Madame President, Mr. Secretary General, Distinguished delegates, ladies and
gentlemen. It is indeed my privilege and honour, on behalf of the Federation of St.
Kitts and Nevis, to once agai address this General Assembly. At the outset,
permit me to congratulate you. Madame President on your election, to lead this
august body at this most significant time and as the first woman from the Group of
Latin America and the Caribbean (GRULAC) to assume the post. I assure you
of my country s fullest support during your tenure.

Reform of the United Nations

The opening session of this UN General Assembly featured excerpts from former
Secretary General. Kofi A nan of blessed memory, in which he made the case that

to solve the wide range of global problems the United Nations was
critical. Multilateralism with the UN system at its fulcrum has long informed our
global engagements.

The United Nations has been, is, and will continue to be critical to global peace,
progress and prosperity. That is why Madam President there is need to move
i

urgently to reform the UN making it more responsive to the needs and conce s of

ail and in particular Small Island Developing States (SIDS). The UN has become
too preoccupied with summitry and less on delivery. The cooperation deficit
among member states stymies the forward m rch of humanity. A reformed UN
must become a body of greater action and fewer words. We need urgent action on
climate change, Non Communicable Diseases (NCDs), glob l cooperation, eace,
prosperity and the reordering of the inte ational financial system.

Guided by this year s theme: Making the United Nations Relevant to All People:
Global Leadership and Shared. Responsibilities for Peaceful, Eq itable and
Sustainable Societies ', my delegation, is of the view that this theme allows us to

address the unfai ess and inequity of the inte ational development order and we
urge a new and more inclusive, equitable and sustainable development paradigm,.

Sustai able Society/ Climate Cha ge

Madame President,
My country, though the smallest country in the Western Hemisphere, has always
had its own set of goals, long before the MDGs and SDGs were enunciated. Over a
week ago, we celebrated thirty five (35) years of Independence. We have made

significant progress towards alleviating poverty, providing free primary and
secondary education, providing access to affordable health care and enhancing the
standard of living of our citizens.

All these gains can be erased by the phenomenon of climate change. The
damage the OECS sub-region sustained last year from Hurricanes Irma and

Maria was unimaginable. The United Nations High Level Pledging Conference in
2

the aftermath of these hurricanes was an attempt to chart the way forward in
creating resilience and building back better. We ask that member states with
outstanding commitments deal with these as soon as practicable. We applaud
those countries which have already made good on their pledges. There is still a lot
to be done to restore affected ember states but it requires strong, meaningful and
enduring international partnerships.

We continue to highlight, on the one hand, our inherent vulnerabilities to
natural disasters, and on the other, an unflinching determination to maintain a
sustainable society. Our responsibility is clear. Individually and collectively we
must commit to reducing the amount of harmful materials we emit into the
environment. It is a matter of great regret that Nations such as my own continue to
pay dearly for a debt we did not create.

Madame President,

Our people see the impact of climate change on their lives and livelihoods. Climate
change is largely the consequence of actions of more developed countries, their
carbon emissions and harmful lifestyles. Yet SIDS pay an unfair price. A price so
hi h that, for many of us, Climate Change presents an existential threat.

How will the UN assist our region with the prevalence of the
Sargassum seaweed which has adversely impacted the Caribbean? Sargassum
affects our marine environment in particular our coastal fisheries and. has affected
the revenues of the fisher folk of the region. Hotels, beaches and other touris ,
related activities have been severely impacted. It is my fervent hope that my plea
today for international intervention will bring some relief to the people of our
region. We have to hold countries accountable for environmental degradation not
3

only in their jurisdictions but also for the degradation they cause to other
states. The United Nations system presents the best vehicle for this.

We welcome the funding mechanisms established to assist countries, particularly
highly vulnerable SIDS. However, the process must be transparent, easily
accessible and, most importantly, the commitments from donor countries must bear
fruit. That being said, the international community cannot on the one hand claim

to help SIDS while i the same vein classify us as middle and high-income
countries based on archaic financial mo els that ultimately deny access to critical
developmental assistance and hinder investment financing. We reiterate our calls
for the international community to address with urgency the sterile measure of per
capita income now employed. Equally important, the issues of disaster risk,
insurance and recognition of the unique vulnerabilities of small states .must be
addressed. My country remains committed to the Sustainable Development goals

and the commitments in the SAMOA Pathway.

Internationai Architecture

The developmental efforts of small states are being thwarted by an unfair financial
architecture with the threat of de-risking and loss of correspondent banking
relationships. This is compounded, by the very discriminatory and irrational
bl cklisting of countries that are forced to divert scarce resources to address the
onerous and arbitrary demands of the EU Code of Conduct Group and other

entities created by large highly developed countries. It is absolutely unfair to
subject some counties to evaluation and ever fluctuating standards while others are
exempt. The threats to the survival of small states is real. I therefore call on this

Body to bring the light of small states like St. Kitts and Nevis to the forefront of
4

the inte ational discourse and to bring an end to such discriminatory practices. At
great cost, my country and other small states are attempting to rise to the
challenges posed by the unfair inte ational financial architecture. However, the
frequency and arbitrariness of these unilateral demands derail essential
development efforts in small states. I submit to this Body that we deserve and have
a right to expect fairness, transparency and consistency of treatment of all states. A
clear rules based financial system which applies to all states must be our collective
goal.

Conflict / Peace and S fety

My Government is mindful that without peace there can be no shared prosperity.
We have been aggressively confronting the problem of crime and violence from
several fronts. We condemn all acts of violence and support efforts to maintain
peace. My Government will use every resource available to achieve a stable,
peaceful and equitable society that our people expect and deserve.

St. Kitts and Nevis supports the calls for diplomacy to address the conflicts around

the world and is particularly heartened by the welcomed dialogue on the Korean
Peninsula. The Caribbean is a zone of peace and our clear philosophy is to promote
peace, friendship and dialogue whilst avoiding conflict with other territories. In
this regard a denuclearized world is a most desirable objective for all humankind.

Throughout the Caribbean, we suffer from an increase in crime connected to the
trade in small arms, light weapons and the drug trade. These weapons flow into the
Caribbean where they are not manufactured and are linked to an insatiable drug
appetite in the West. It is beyond our power to unilaterally control the flow of guns
5

into the region or the habit that drives the dangerous global drug trade. We seek
the assistance of the international community as we work tirelessly to address this
scourge. My country remains fully committed to the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT).
Our increasing internal budgetary allocations are an indication of our commitment
to the aintenance of safety a d security.

Health

Madame President,

St. Kitts and Nevis is elated that just this week, this august body joined together to
commit to scaling up multi-stake older and multi-sectoral responses for the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in the context of the
2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. Our region remains encumbered by the
unfortunate burden that NCDs have placed on our society and economy. The
statistics are stark and startling. 8 out of every 10 deaths In the Caribbean are

attributable to NCDs, 40% of which are premature and 70% of this number is
preven able. Hypertension is our leading risk factor for death. The Caribbean's
diabetes rate is double the global rate. We are facing an NCD crisis in our region.

In this regard we applaud the launch of the Defeat-NCDs partnership earlier this

week and CARICOM and CARPHA shall rovide the fullest support to this new
partnership.

We endorse a holistic approach to health and I am happy to report that we have
shifted into high gear to make an essential component, of global health, universal
health coverage, a reality for all citizens in St. Kitts and Nevis. I must remind us
that NCDs and climate change are twin sides of the same coin. They are
symptoms of the failure of the extant development paradigm.
6

Social Development

Madam President,
My govermnent believes in making an equitable society a reality for all citizens in
St. Kitts and Nevis. In keeping with our commitment to Transform Our World
throu h the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, we have endeavored to create

an equitable pathway by improving the standard of living for the most vulnerable
so they can become self-sufficient and productive citizens and residents.

Partnershi s

I cannot address this great body and not recognize our dear friend Tai an. My
gove ment views the United Nations as a people s organization, for all people,
including the people of Taiwan. We strongly believe Taiwan has an important and
continuing role to play in inte ational development strategies as they have
had great success in technology, agriculture, health and renewable energy. We
advocate that Taiwan be given space to add to the dialogue, progress and well

being of the global community.

We also continue to voice our support of our Caribbean sister Cuba and to call for
the normalization of relations between Cuba and the United States of America to
alleviate the real suffering ca sed to the Cuban people of this policy of exclusion.

My country is conscious of the current difficulties in Venezuela. Venezuela has
been a very good friend to the Caribbean and St Kitts and Nevis continues to call

7

for peacef l dialogue to resolve issues in Venezuela with due regard to the rule of
law a d the democratic ideals we old dear.

Conclusion

As I close Ma ame President, I must remind t at our
people want action. They want results. We need to see all Global Leaders
come together to create and maintain stability, equality and peace in our countries,
so that our collective contributions can prevent and avoid war and violence; end
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, a d create

a level playing field for small states to thrive. May we be always mindful and
proactive to ensure that no country is left behind in the pursuit and achievement

of the 2030 Agenda.

It is our shared responsibility to create the best opportunities and fulfill
the expectations of our current and future generations. I am convinced, Madame
President that if we continue to ork steadfastly, always vigilant and focused on
the overarching goals, we shall contribute to a more relevant, fair, productive and
meaningful United Nations, and by extension, a better world, for all our peoples.

I thank you.

8

