I

PERMANENT MISSION OF SAINT LUCIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS

STATEMENT BY

THE HONOURABLE ALLEN M. CHASTANET
PRIME MINISTER OF SAINT LUCIA

AND MINISTER FOR FINANCE, ECONOMIC GROWTH, JOB CREATION, EXTERNAL
AFFAIRS AND THE PUBLIC SERVICE

TO THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE

SESSION of the united nations general ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK

FRIDAY, 28™ SEPTEMBER, 2018

Please check against delivery.

Madame President,

Allow me, to begin by congratulating you on your election to the presidency of the Seventy
Third Session ofthe General Assembly. Your assumption ofthis important office contributes to

our progress inbreaking down the barriers of inequality - with you one of only four women to
have held this position in seventy-three years.

As the first woman from our Latin America and Caribbean region to have been elected

President of ihe General Assembly, we areespecially proud ofyour achievement. Saint Lucia is
a staunch advocate for gender equality evidenced by the large percentage of Saint Lucian
women who hold senior positions in and out of government, including the four female

Ministers in my cabinet. Rest assured that you have my delegation's full support in the
upcoming session.
Madame President,

I stand before you today as a leader ofa Small Island Developing State - aSIDS, which is also a
Middle Income Coimtry - a MIC. Saint Lucia's engagement in the international system is

framed by acronyms that represent designations and categorizations that have been globally
accepted. That SIDS are more vulnerable to natural hazards than other countries, has become
accepted. That the resulting damage from natural disasters has a greater overall impact on our
economies by virtue ofour small size has also become widely accepted. That SIDS which are
also Middle Income Coimtries face additional challenges because of the assumptions regarding

the capabilities of countries carrying that designation has been acknowledged.
We all know these truths - they are self-evident. These halls echo with the words of SIDS and

MICs leaders year after year making plain and clear the challenges we face. Yet global policies,
programs and strategies remain unfairly un-accommodating to these very real and true
challenges. The world acknowledges our "acronyms" but little or nothing changes. Saint Lucia
remains economically vulnerable to de-risking and the loss ofcorrespondent banking relations.
We remain out of reach of any access to concessionary finance. Our reputations are unfairly

tarnished by tax labels. We continue to struggle under the weight of international frameworks
that do not provide an enabling environment for my country to chart an effective sustainable
development path, oreven to beable to take control ofourown destiny.
Madame President, despite the fact that the odds remain stacked against us. Saint Lucia must

still persist. I have an obligation to the people of my coimtry, and so I must find new and
innovative ways to keep my economy growing and ensure and enhance environmental and

social protections. I do not have the luxury to wait for ihe international system to adjust to the
special needs of countries like my own, while natural disasters continue to threaten and erode
the gains we make. In preparation for this hurricane season. Saint Lucia has had to spend three
times the amount of money than we did last season. In order to meet those costs, we have had
to impose new taxes to facilitate this preparedness.

For example, a water tax to assist with the de-sUting of our dam, a gas tax to assist with road
rehabilitation and slope stabilization and an airport tax toassist with the development ofa new
terminal, highway and flood mitigation aroimd the airport. I cannot delay or ignore critical
infrastructure projects, therefore have nochoice but to increase my debt burden, I cannot leave
my country and its citizens exposed, I must find ways tomove forward.
The President of the World Bank has acknowledged that "good health is the foundation of a

country's human capital, and no coimtry can afford low-quality or unsafe healthcare." The
challenge of providing adequate and affordable healthcare is another area of focus for Saint
Lucia. We understand that preventative and affordable healthcare is critical for the social
development of any nation, more so a small island state with a small population. We are

plagued with incidents of individuals who delay seeking early medical assistance due to the
high cost, only to be saddled with a serious diagnosis later - a burden to the state and the
individual that becomes far more expensive than the earlier cost.

We have therefore taken steps to address the issue from multiple angles. We are working with

partners like the European Union and the World Bank, with a goal of implementing the
necessary policies and legislation to give life to a National Health Insurance scheme. We are
also looking into preventive approaches, such as the imposition of appropriate labeling and a
sugar tax, as we grapple with the high prevalence of Non Commimicable Diseases. We are also
expanding our after school programmes that focus on building healthy lifestyles through
physical activity and diet. We are establishing sports academies complete with nutritionists
who will be community based so that theirexpertise canbe shared.
Madame President,

SaintLucia has worked hard to grow and develop, withinthe context of an mtemational system

that acknowledges our existence and needs, only theoretically, because the practical and
tangible manifestation ofthis acknowledgement israrely seen orfelt.
We have seen the disastrous impact of natural disasters brought on by the changes in our

climate. As I speak my country is suffering from the ravages of Kirk, which was on a projected
course north ofSaintLucia but changed direction overnightand moved directly overour island.

This morning Saint Lucia also suffered from an earthquake. Early reports indicate damage to

our utilities that remain above ground and extensive damage to the agricultural sector - once

again my heart goes out to the hard working men and women and to the communities who
depend on agriculture. But be assured regardless of the difficulties, we will provide the
necessary support to help them recover as quickly as possible. My thoughts and prayers are
with Government and people ofBarbados who have also been impacted and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and who now lie in the path of the storm.

Ourresilience as a people and our ability to pick ourselves up should never beused against us.

I applaud Japan, India and the numerous states within the United States of America who have
the capacity to effectively respond to natural disasters, I envy that they have the necessary fiscal
and policy space to enable them to recover and rebuild effectively, but we as SIDS are
continually denied this ability.

We are aware that Dominica, the British Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico among others are still

recovering one year on. Yet little has changed. The CARICOM-UN High Level pledging
conference to support reconstruction efforts in the region following hurricanes Irma and Maria,
received pledges of over US$1.3 billion but there remains a significant gap between the pledges
made and the actual amounts that have been disbursed. While well intended, we have been let
down again.

My delegation welcomes the initiative to convene a High Level meeting on the challenges of
Middle Income Coimtries during this 73rd session of the General Assembly. Saint Lucia has

continued to place our concerns about debt sustainability onthe global agenda. We have joined
the call for the creation of a Highly Indebted Middle Income Country (HIMIC) initiative; based

notonly on the urgent need for debt relief, butalso on the need to acknowledge and highlight
the negative implications of the challenges that Middle Income Coimtries face in accessing
concessionary financing so vital to building resilience in our countries. We fear a business as
usual approach to this meeting, but remain hopeful that it produces substantive outputs with
actionable solutions.

Madame President,

Multilateralism is under threat. We have heard the cries from leaders this week. The winds of

nationalism that threaten to blow us away from our collective endeavours here at the United

Nations are growing. But Saint Lucia believes that it is only within a strong, functioning
multilateral system that the guarantees ofworld peace and security can be provided. To borrow
from our distinguished Secretary General Antonio Guterres: ''In a world in which all problems
are global, there is no way countries can handle issues by themselves; we need global
responses."

The ongoing refonn of the United Nations system is critical. The increasingly chaotic world
requires an organization that is responsive and efficient and that reflects the political and
economic reality of achanging world and of all its member states. We can no longer operate
within a framework of ideologies, poUcies, institutions and patterns of behavior that were
established ina time long past to deal wifii circumstances long gone.

We must be willing to challenge discrimination and exclusion if we endeavour to create an

equal and just world for all. Every country has arole to play in this global environment. We
know this. Saint Lucia joins flie other voices calling for an end to the over half century-old

embargo imposed on our neighbor, Cuba and for an end to all restrictions on the rights of the
Cuban people, to Uberty, security and advancement. Similarly we call for an end to the
restrictioiw placed on the legitimate aspirations of Taiwan to participate as an observer in key
international institutions, such as the WHO, ICAO and the UNFCCC. This is as much for us as
it is for them.

In our hemisphere where confrontations and disagreements exist, I reaffirm Saint Lucia's

position that aU conflicts must be resolved through diplomatic channels. As we work toward
reform of this institution we must ensure that no one is left behind, we must find the political

will and courage to ensure diat the evolved United Nations not only acknowledge the
challenges of its membership, but that it provides adequate solutions for all.
Madame President,

Notwithstanding the myriad challenges that frame our engagement in the international system.
Saint T'lcia remains committed to the objectives of multilateraUsm. The adoption of the 2030

Agenda for sustainable development was atriumph of multilateral cooperation, but it is the

successful implementation of the agenda, the fulfillment of the promise of its purpose that will
define the true measure of our collective will to transform and develop as aglobal community.

It is within this context that Saint Lucia has committed to present our voluntary national

review of our progress in implementing the 2030 Agenda at the 2019 High Level Political
Forum. Iam also pleased to report that Saint Lucia wiU be depositing the required instrument to

ratify the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, before the start of COP 24. This week Saint
Lucia also reaffirmed our commitment to international law by signing on to the Regional

Agreement on Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice in Environmental Matters
in Latin America and the Caribbean and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.

In order to build peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies, SIDS and SIDS who are MICs
have to look to different courses of action in order to arrive atmore immediate solutions to our

development challenges, while we continue to call for changes in the international system. Saint
Lucia has recorded two successive years ofconsistent economic growth, we have grown ourtax

revenue and are on pace to attract record foreign direct investment. We are still competing,

having to find new ways to ensure our growth and development, but imagine how much better
we could do with building economic and social resilience to further enhance our ability to meet
our sustainable development goals and improve the quality of life of our citizens, if a fair and
just international enabling environment was made available tous.
Madame President,

Let us not forget that we come together here as nations united, to build institutions, norms and
rules to advance shared interests - interests of all, not of a select few. The enormous challenges

of our moment in history require a renewed social contract, one based on shared responsibility
and the space to achieve this global compact is right here at the United Nations. Let us draw on

the inspiration of Nelson Mandela and his incredible ability to forgive and find solutions for the
greater human good.

There is aBuddhist proverb that reads: "to know and not do, is not yet to know". If we claim to
know and accept the special circumstances and vulnerabilities of the SIDS, and yet we do

nothing to remedy the systems and frameworks that exacerbate our vulnerability, do we really
know? Have we truly accepted? While the answers to these questions may not be readily
available, countries like my own have to chart a development path through this changing and
volatile world. It is my hope that as multilateralism evolves, and with it this institution, we
arrive at "knowing" and at doing what must bedone.

