statement

by

HonourableTuilaepaLupesoliaiSaileleMalielegaoi,
Prime Minister of the Independent State of Samoa
at the

General Debate,

United Nations General Assembly
Seventy third session.
New York, 28 September 2018

Madam President,
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen.

I have had the privilege to address the General Assembly in the last 21
yearsas Samoa's Prime Minister and my message has remained consistent

throughout the passing years.
Put simply, '^climate change poses the single greatest threat

especially to Small Island developing states like Samoa, not
through our doing or choice, and that the need to take effective

action to mitigate against climate change impacts is urgent and
real".

Climate change as well encompasses the breadth of security
issues facing our Blue Pacific region including human security.

environmental and resource security, transnational crime and
cyber security.

As we have explained to the United Nations, climate change is one of

the most pressing security challenges for island countries - affecting food
security, access to safe water, fundamentally affecting our ability to draw
sustenance from the pristine ocean and seas that surround us. Climate

change is the highest priority challenge facing countries of the world and

does not discriminate between rich and poor.
And the logic of our perspective is simple.
Climate change embodies the fullness of Samoa's realities and

aspirations. It impacts our society, our economy, our culture, our faith and
our way of life and will continue to be our overriding priority policy concern

and major pre-occupation including of our Pacificregion, today and weli
into the future.

It is a societai problem requiring a decisive response from the world
community. Its giobal reach and impact shouid unite and strengthen our
resolve, not weaken and divide us. As a united community, there is a great
deal that we could achieve to arrest and even reverse the threat of climate

change. Its impacts are worsening by the day. No one country, or single
group of nations, and no single organization can solely win the war against

climate change. The divergent, yet inextricably linked interests of member
states demands that we work together.

Our Paris Agreement on Climate Change was a beacon of hope

especially for the vulnerable Island states. It is based on shared
responsibilities, trust, collaboration and principled action. It demonstrates a
new brand of cooperation and broad outlook, where the narrow pursuits of
self-interests, the use of economic and political expediencies were to be set
aside. It was meant to be a timely reminder that no action is too small or

insignificant. All contributions matter and every action counts irrespective
of who provides it. Importantly, It places the responsibility of addressing

climate change squarely on every leader and on every Individual country in
terms of the implementation of their Nationally determined contributions to
the Paris Agreement.

It is indeed worrisome and alarming that the level of commitments to

the Paris Agreement by member states will not keep global warming

anywhere below 1.5 degrees Celsius which is the ideal and moral goal to
save Planet Earth. Without that, the continuing existence of some low-lying
islands in our Pacific region and elsewhere will be in grave doubt.
We must work together with a sense of urgency and commitment to

address climate change, today, and now. It should not just be the science
that recommends what we should do, but also our conscience and the

political will to follow through.

Clearly, we want leaders who view the world as a single constituency
where all must work together within the limits of their capacity and
capability to be part of the total solution. Samoa wants to be part of the
solution because it is in our interest to do so.

As for those suggesting they are implementing bold actions for the

sake of our vulnerable islands, they need to be quietly reminded that in the
final analysis, implementation initiatives, will ultimately benefit their
economies, people and survival of their countries.

For vulnerable countries, the issue is not about setting new targets,
commissioning more studies and reports or even more polite talk shops

and structured dialogue sessions, it is about adaptation now and long-term
survival.

The United Nations remains our last best hope to provide the political
will and the necessary commitment to turn the tide against climate change.
Samoa appeals to member states of our organization in positions of

world leadership, to lead the charge in finding and implementing solutions
to the causes of climate change. As custodians of our world's environment,
we owe it to our future generations to do what needs to be done quickly,
and decisively.

In the same way that nations in leadership roles are called to account
in doing the right thing for our world, so must all the member states of the
UN uphold their part of the bargain in the work that needs to be done.

Without this cooperation from all member states, reaching the objectives
we all know should be achieved, would continue to elude us.

The Pacific region is already facing the destructive impacts of climate
change and disasters. Cyclones, floods, droughts. Sea level rise and ocean
acidification are taking their toll on the health and well being of our
peoples, environment and economies. Disaster related economic losses in

Pacific isiand countries as a percentage of GDP are higher than aimost
anywhere else in the world.

Our people are waiting, the world is watching. It is incumbent on
each individual leader and country to raise the level of ambition not just as

an inspirational goal, but as deliverables of the Paris Agreement. For the
Pacific peoples and our Blue Pacific region, urgent ambitious action on

climate change is the only option. We welcome the determination
resonated in the UNSecretary General's remarks to the General Assembly
earlier this month to 'sound the alarm' on the need for bolder action on

climate change.

These are big asks to deliver on. It will be naive to think otherwise.
But when the future existence of sovereign island

nations,

populations and cultures are at stake, then there is a moral imperative for
the world to act decisively and collectively.
Madam President

The Pacific leaders are increasinaiv conscious of and concerned about the

security of our reoion. And we look at security not just from the orthodox

perspective of state security, but what security means for us Pacific
communities. The Framework for Pacific Regionalism identifies security as
one of the four objectives of regionalism - "Security that ensures stable
and safe human, environmental and political conditions for all".

Forum Leaders have renewed commitment to work together as one

Blue Pacific continent particularly in view of the renewed geopolitical
interests in the Pacific region. Suddenly the Pacific is swimming in a rising

tide of so-called 'fit for purpose' strategies stretched from the tip of Africa,
encompassing the Indian Ocean and morphing into the vast Blue

PacificOcean continent - that is our home and place. The big powers are
doggedly pursuing strategies to widen and extend their reach and

inculcating a far-reaching sense of insecurity.
The renewed vigour with which a Tree and Open Indo-Pacific
strategy' is being advocated and pursued leaves us with much uncertainty.
For the Pacific there is a real risk of privileging Indo over the 'Pacific'
While the Pacific region currently enjoys a period of relative stability,
drivers of instability exist in the region and beyond. The 2017 State of
Pacific Regionalism Report indicated that shifting global and regional
geopolitics is creating an increasingly complex and crowded region that

places the Pacific at the centre of contemporary global geopolitics. This
trend, coupled with broader challenges such as climate change, rising
inequality, resource depletion, maritime boundary disputes and advances in
technology,

will

continue to shape the

Pacific

regional security

environment.

While the world be-labours the issues of security around military

might and the wonders of technological advancement in reaching such
ends, our priority in the pacific is to maintain stability of our governments

and countries. We can do this through a review of our governance

pathways and ensure that our elected leaders respond to people's needs.
Pacific Island Forum Members have a proud history of working

collectively in response to events and issues that have challenged regional
security, peace and stability, from the 1985 Rarotonga Treaty

created

a nuclear free zone in the South Pacific, to a collective approach to

addressing the existential threat of climate change.
The Pacific region's current geopolitical and geostrategic context
underlines the need for an integrated and comprehensive security

architecture, incorporating an expanded concept of security. A stable and
resilient security environment provides the platform for achieving the
region's sustainable development aspirations.

In recognition of this, in 2017, Forum Leaders "agreed to build on the
Biketawa Declaration and other Forum security related declarations as a

foundation for strategic future regional

responses, recognizing the

importance of an expanded concept of security and regional cooperation in

building resilience to disasters and climate change.^" Leaders have also
prioritized action on climate change and disaster risk management,
fisheries, and oceans management and conservation - all of which have
significant security elements.

As if being vulnerable to climate change is not a lifelong challenge,
the label of "Pacific Small island developing state" can also have its

unintended trials and tribulations. For far too long we have been given to

believe "'they are little and classified 'have nots'. We are susceptible to
being characterized as countries that have little, and that we should be
grateful for whatever is offered to us. We are highly protective of our
means of livelihoods and have embraced regional action to ensure the

sustainability of our fisheries resources. And we are actively asserting our
ambitions to ensure that there is inheritance for the generations to come.
Any such approach for engagement with partners must be genuine

and durable and premised on understanding, friendship, mutual benefit
and a collective ambition to achieve sustainable results. They must also be
nonpartisan and non-interventionist.

And in the process, our partners have fallen short of acknowledging the
integrity of Pacific leadership and the responsibility they carry for every

decision made, in order to garner support for the sustainable development
of their nations. Some might say that there is a 'patronizing' nuance in
believing that Pacific nations do not know what they were doing or were
incapable of reaping the benefits of close relations with countries that are

and will be in the region for some time to come. In cases where emerging
partners have engaged with Pacific countries without conditionality, the
relationships are

perceived to

be associated with corruption or

unprecedented environmental degradation. One has the tendency to be

bemused by the fact that the reaction is an attempt to hide what we see as
strategic neglect.

8

Where we are now would not have been possible without the

valuable support of our circle of partners, and the value of the partnerships
we had nurtured and cultivated over the years to respond to the multitude
of needs of our people.

The friendly relations we have with some partners are construed by others
as compromising and obtrusive, prompting someto speak up for us to ward
off the influences we are supposedly too naive to recognize. By the same

token we are given alternatives that reflect interests beyond altruism and
conversion of the poor. As Pacific leaders we need to ask ourselves what

we ought to do in order to make a difference for us and for the world -

and to promote our values premised on peace stability and security.
Our geographical isolation and insularity no longer shields or protects
us from the increasingly complex and dynamic security challenges transnational crime, nuclear proliferation, challenges to sovereignty, and
humanitarian crises. The rules based international system is being bent out

of shape. Gone were the days when we took only what we needed from
our environment; when we were a lot more conscious of the importance of
the continuity of our cultures and values, unadulterated by the infringing,

impinging world around us. Then, we did not worry much about borders
because the original migrations of our peoples defined for us our ocean
space and place. Poverty was not a part of our consciousness because we
cared for each other and the oceans provided their bounty.

We should not be influenced by economic dependence as that Is a
compromise in itself. We should seek to strengthen domestic cohesion,

develop resilience and rethink our governance pathways.
The Leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum are committed to a vision

for the Pacific - that it be a region of peace, harmony, security, social
inclusion, and prosperity, so that all Pacific people can lead free, healthy,
and productive lives now and into the future

And moreover, we have

committed to working together to achieve this vision.
The Blue Pacific platform offers all Pacific countries the adaptive

capabilities to address a changing geostrategic landscape. The opportunity
to realize the full benefits of the Blue Pacific rests in our ability to work and
stand together as a political bloc. And the challenge for us is maintaining
solidarity in the face of intense engagement of an ever growing number of
partners in our region. We should not let that divide us!
Madam President

In 4 weeks time, Samoa will be hosting the Interregional meeting of

Small Island developing states and their development partners in
preparation for the five-year review of the SAMOA Pathway during the
High-level week next year in September. My Government looks forward to
welcoming our guests and we thank the United Nations member states and

the Small Island Developing States in particular for agreeing to allow the

SAMOA Pathway to make a brief return to its namesake and birthplace.

10

Let me conclude by acknowledging the support of all those member
states of the United Nations, Samoa's circle of friends, who supported our
candidate's re-election to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Thank you

11

