Republic of San Marino

STATEMENT BY
H.E. MR. NICOLA RENZI

MINISTER OF FOREIGN AND
POLITICAL AFFAIRS
WITH FUNCTIONS OF PRIME MINISTER
OF THE

REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO

AT THE GENERAL DEBATE

OF THE 73'^^^ SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York,29 September 2018

Check against delivery

Madam President,

Mr. Secretary General,
Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of San Marino, I would like to
congratulate H.E. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces on her election as
President of the 73rd Session of the UN General Assembly and to wish her a
fruitful work.

Fler long experience both as Ecuador's Ambassador to the United Nations and

as Minister of Foreign Affairs, as well as her deep knowledge of the
Organisation, are valuable resources for the United Nations.

The Republic of San Marino, which this year has taken on the role of VicePresident of the General Assembly, supports the priorities of her agenda, as set

out in her inaugural speech, and believes that these are important to give a
fundamental impetus to the necessary reforms concerning the most important
areas of the UN activity.

The San Marino delegation will ensure you. Madam President, its utmost
collaboration during all works of the General Assembly.

I would also like to express my country's gratitude to the outgoing President,
H.E. Miroslav Lajcak, for the important work carried out during the 72nd
Session.

My country would also like to extend its special thanks to Secretary General
Antonio Guterres, for his energy and determination in leading the United
Nations and in the reform processes of the Organisation.
Madam President,

The theme chosen for this session,"Making the United Nations Relevant to AU

People: Global Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable,
and Sustainable Societies", is undoubtedly of great relevance. It gives Member

States the opportunity to contribute constructively to the work of the General
Assembly.

There is a strong correlation between the two concepts that make up the
subject of the debate: on the one hand, while the United Nations must be

closer to its citizens by translating the fundamental principles of its global
action into concrete results, it is essential, on the other hand, not only to
defend, but also to strengthen international cooperation and our Organisation.
Recent developments in the global socio-political landscape have created
obstacles to the development of multilateralism and are putting it at risk.

Today,in consideration of the magnitude of global challenges, their increasingly
evident interrelationships, the need for Member States to work together to
overcome difficulties, it is more and more essential to adopt an approach
towards common and coordinated policies,in one word multilateralism.

The Republic of San Marino has decided to cooperate within the framework of
international structures and mechanisms at the top of which is the United

Nations, because it believes in the strength of dialogue, democracy and respect
for others. Indeed, the very peaceful coexistence of peoples reUes on such
values.

My country believes that the United Nations must increase its leadership role in
the management of global governance due to its deeply democratic nature, its
universal participation and undisputed legitimacy.
The cultural diversity and traditions represented within the United Nations are

not an obstacle, but an enormous asset, which makes it possible to adopt an
approach reconciling the interests of the international community, so as to
attain human and sustainable development.

We cannot ignore the fact that in recent years other fora, such as the G20,have

and are exerting a great influence at the global level in the management of
global governance.

San Marino is grateful to these informal groups for the role they have played.
However, in their decision-making process, these groups should be more
transparent and inclusive and should take into account the interests, concerns

and aspirations of the countries that are excluded, in particular those of
developing countries. The action of these informal groups must not be in
competition with, but complementary to that of the United Nations.

Trust, inclusiveness and dialogue are essential elements in support of
multilateralism and its ability to produce concrete results at the global level.
Madam President,

This year s theme is inevitably linked to the UN reform process. This process is
of fundamental importance for the future world balance, for guaranteeing
international peace and security and must remain at the centre of all our efforts.

The reforms must make the structures of the Organisation functional to the
objectives of its global action: the credibility and authoritativeness of the
United Nations depend on its ability to transform objectives into concrete
actions that have a real and measurable impact on the lives of people.
The United Nations must be closer to its citizens, communicate better and
show them the importance and effectiveness of multilateral collaboration for
the lives of all of us.

In this regard, the Republic of San Marino reiterates its support to the reform
agenda Secretary-General Antonio Guterres is implementing in the fields of
peace and security, management and UN Development System.
We are confident that these reforms will improve UN contribution to
sustainable development, will ensure greater effectiveness in the resolution of
armed conflicts, in the search for sustainable peace, and ultimately will
strengthen the UN system's ability to produce more concrete and visible
results.

Madam President,

The Republic of San Marino expresses its concern about the increasing number
of conflicts in many parts of the world and supports the coordinated action of
the United Nations in the field of peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

Religious radicalism, terrorism, transnational organised crime, trafficking in
drugs and human beings, weapons of mass destmction, violent extremism,
marginalization and exclusion pose a threat to international peace and security.
It is essential to analyse the root causes of conflicts if we want to favour

disarmament and de-radicaHsation. At the same time, we need to promote,
through education, respect for and protection of human rights, the rule of law
and access to justice.

The United Nations has often been criticised in recent years for the inability of
the Security Council to intervene adequately in Syria and other conflict
situations. Unfortunately, this has undermined the credibility of our
Organisation.

The Republic of San Marino hopes that the Security Council wiU now be able
to fulfil its mandate effectively.

In this regard and in order to support a rapid and decisive action of the Security
Council,I am pleased to recall that my country has joined the Code of Conduct
drawn up by the ACT Group (Accountability, Coherence, Transparency) to
refrain from using veto in cases of crimes such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. San Marino has also joined the Joint proposal by
France and Mexico for voluntary suspension of the veto by the permanent
members of the Security Council.

In pursuing the goals of peacemaking and sustainable peace, the United
Nations must promote a strategic partnership in which governments, the
United Nations system, international, regional and sub-regional organisations,
civil society, the private sector and universities work together to achieve
common goals.

The relationship between peace and development is clear: there can be no

sustainable development without peace, just as there can be no peace without
sustainable development.

In this regard, the implementation of Agenda 2030 becomes essential for the
construction ofinclusive, resilient and peaceful societies.

Three years have passed since the adoption of Agenda 2030.
The international community is working hard to make the Sustainable
Development Goals(SDGs)come true.

While, on the one hand, progress has been made in the implementation of
some Goals and Targets, on the other hand, it should be noted that there are

strong inequalities in the implementation of the Agenda not only between
countries but also within them.

The Republic of San Marino underlines the central role plaid by the High-Level
Political Forum in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Objectives,
thanks to its foUow-up activity. In this context, San Marino supports the
Ministerial Declaration that was adopted this year by the Forum.
Madam President,

The most difficult and important challenge to the achievement of the objective
of sustainable development is the eradication of poverty in aU its forms and
dimensions,in particular extreme poverty.

Although the level of extreme poverty has fallen significantly in the last ten
years, as shown by the data contained in the Secretary General's report on
SDGs, poverty nevertheless remains the main cause of hunger and the number
of undernourished people reached 815 million in 2016.

The Agenda emphasizes universal respect for human rights and human dignity:
peace, justice, equality and non-discrimination are fundamental rights whose
implementation becomes essential for the construction of inclusive societies.

The principle according to which no one should be left behind requires the
adoption of specific measures to support people in vulnerable situations.

Agenda 2030 takes into account the needs of children, young people, people
with disabilities, the elderly, indigenous people, refugees, displaced persons,
migrants, people living in areas affected by humanitarian emergencies, or in
situations of armed conflict.

Respect for cultural and ethnic diversity, as well as equal opportunities are
central to the full realization of human potential.

The promotion of actions in support of children and young people is a key
element, since they must grow up free from all forms of abuse and exploitation.
Unfortunately, children pay a very high price in areas of armed conflict: many
lose their lives, are kidnapped, raped, used as a shield or recruited as soldiers.

Moreover, their schools are often destroyed, as are their hospitals, depriving
them of their fundamental rights.
My country, which is part of the Group of Friends of CAAC, believes that

international humanitarian laws and human rights laws must be respected in
conflict situations.

San Marino has ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflicts and it supports
the Paris Commitments.

Moreover, this year San Marino has added its name to the list of countries

supporting the Safe Schools Declaration, an important tool for the protection
of educational facilities from military use during conflicts.
Only with the effective and fuU participation of women in decision-making
processes that have a direct impact on their lives, will it be possible to build
sustainable, resilient and inclusive societies.

The Republic of San Marino reaffirms its commitment to the fight against aU
forms of violence based on gender, all forms of sexual abuse and exploitation.

The objective of gender equality, emancipation of women and girls and full
realization of their human rights must be achieved.

Gender equality must also be translated into equality in educational
opportunities, with particular regard to scientific subjects, because technology,
science and innovation in general play a vital role in meeting global challenges
and in the promotion of sustainable development.

At the same time - and the Republic of San Marino is particularly convinced of
this - the perception of sustainable development through new technologies,
science and innovation must be transmitted through means of communication
that do not distort the truth, so as not to undermine the very concept of
freedom.

The Republic of San Marino, in this regard, is offering a concrete and
motivated contribution, also at international level, to the theme of correct

information, with the objective of combating the increasingly dangerous
phenomenon of fake news, which is deceptive, uncontrolled and able to incite
hatred and nurture prejudices.

The commitment of the international community must be directed towards all
vulnerable groups, without exception. People with disabilities and the elderly,
for example, must be guaranteed full participation in social, economic and
cultural life.

Madam President,

The effects of climate change are one of the greatest challenges of our time
because of their unprecedented impact on our lives and, in particular, on the
lives of the poorest and most vulnerable.

At 1.1 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels, 2017 was one of the hottest
three years of all time.

The effects of cHmate change do not respect national borders, they spread
everywhere, in every country and continent. They are increasingly damaging
national economies, communities and countries. This is a global problem that

requires solutions that need to be coordinated globally. Moreover,it is essential
to strengthen international cooperation in order to help developing countries to
move towards a low-emission economy. The Republic of San Marino
recognises the deep synergy between the implementation of the Paris
Agreement on CHmate Change and Agenda 2030 and welcomes the recent

entry into force of the Agreement. Events related to climate change, such as
drought, which generates food and water shortages, have increased competition
to have access to these and other natural resources. Conflicts are a major cause
of food insecurity. As a result, about 74 million people today are in urgent need
of humanitarian assistance.

The number of conflicts has increased over the last decade and has led to the

displacement of miUions of people. In 2017, 68 milHon people were forced to
leave their homes. In addition to persecution and armed conflicts, natural
disasters such as floods, earthquakes and hurricanes, partly due to the effects of
climate change, have forced millions of people to seek refuge in other
countries. Other disasters, such as socio-economic deprivations, lack of food,
water, education and health, have led miUions of people to seek their fortune

elsewhere. All this has contributed to the increase in migratory flows, a major
challenge that the international community has been facing for some years.
San Marino has followed the intergovernmental negotiations that led, at the end
ofJuly, to the finaUzation of the Global Compact for safe, orderly and regular
migration, to be formally adopted in December during the Intergovernmental
Conference in Morocco.

Given its transnational nature, no country can face the migration phenomenon
on its own. The Compact strengthens the universality of human rights,
including those of migrants, their dignity - regardless of their status -, access to

basic rights and their protection. Its objective is not to stop migration, but to
manage it in the best possible way through strengthened international

cooperation. My country believes that the implementation of the Compact wiU
bring greater security, order and economic progress for the benefit of all.

The Global Compact is a clear example of what multilateralism can do, of its
potential and importance, similarly to the recent Agenda 2030, the Paris

Agreement on Climate Change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Indeed,
through tangible measures aimed at financing development, the Compact lays
the foundations for a global plan of action.
Madam President,

In order to face today's world challenges, we need a renewed commitment to

multilateralism. This is only possible through a strong United Nations
Organisation, capable of coordinating, in an effective way, our economic,
environmental and social poUcies at a global, regional and local level.

In conclusion, I would lilce to reiterate the strong support of the Republic of
San Marino to all initiatives aimed at implementing the principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

Thank you for your attention.

