Perm nent Mission of

The Democr tic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe to the United Nations

73rd SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENER L ASSEMBLY
GENERAL DEBATE
NEW YORK, 29 SEPTEMBER 2018

STATEMENT BY

HIS EXCELLENCY
¦ MR. URBINO JOSE GON ALVES BOTELHO

MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND COMMUNITIES OF THE
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE

Check against delivery

675 Third Ave ue, Suite 1807, New York, NY 10017

Madam President of the 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly
Your Excellency the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Heads of State nd Government
Your E cellences Ministers of Foreign Affairs and E ternal Relations

Distinguished Delegates
L die and Gentlemen

Your Excellences,

It is with great honor and satisfaction that, for the first time, I address this magna General
Assembly, as the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Communities, representing the De ocratic
Rep blic of Sao Tome and Principe.
First of all, let me, with great pleasure, address my first words to Her Excellency Maria Fernanda
Espinosa Garces, whom I congratulate for her election to the presidency of the 73rd Session of the
General Assembly of the United Nations, expressing our support to Your Excellency in the course
of your mandate, which, we believe, will be very successful. We emphasize the fact that Your
E cellency is only the fourth woman to undertake such a noble function and we hope this number
to increase in the future in the name of a greater inclusion of women in positions of such
i portance in the Organization.
I also congratulate the outgoing President, His E cellency Miroslav Lajcak, for the manner in
which he has conducted the work of the previous General Assembly Session, in a judicious,
zealous and selfless ay, in an extremely difficult international context.

I also would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of the former SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the late Kofi Annan. A man who dedicated his life in making the,
world a more peaceful place and worked tirelessly for that purpose, always with a great sense of
our humanity. We must preserve his legacy by continuing to strengthen our Organization as the
ultimate and overall guarantor for the search for peaceful, durable, consensual solutions,

2

legitimated by inte ational law, in order to achieve the desired goals of peace, security, stability
and progress for all.

Madam President
Ladies and Gentlemen

We welcome the choice of the theme for this Session: Making the United Nations Relevant to All
People: Global Leadership and Shared-Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable nd Sustainable
Societies.
Indeed, our Organization is . facing very complex challenges for which it is called to provide
effective, concrete and comprehensive responses that are truly relevant to all eople.

Let us emphasize the issue of migration, where the global leadership of the United Nations must
at all times manifest itself in fostering dialogue among nations seeking global solutions and
promoting concerted policies in hosting the refugees, as well as in supporting their countries of
origin, to better address this world-wide roblem, that often has devastating consequences for those .
who in search of better living conditions, are exposed to flagrant injustices everywhere.
If we really want peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies, our efforts must continue to be
conducted seeking solutions not only to migratory problems but also, at the negotiation table, to
mitigate the effects of the current armed conflicts existing throughout the world, and to prevent
the emergence and escalation of regional tensions which can generate others of the same kind.
We therefore launch from this tribune a strong appeal to continue the dialogue aiming the peaceful
resolution of tensions that are occurring all over the planet, areas of conflict that keep claimin
thousands of innocent lives, in particular the conflict in Syria.
We also continue to call for an understanding in the Central African Republic, so that the
negotiations can put an end to a conflict that has harmed thousands of people, whose refugee
situation has led to a serious humanitarian crisis in the country.
We warmly salute our sister Republic of Guinea Bissau for convening legislative elections next
November, and express them the best of lucks as we are certain that these elections will mark a

3

new era of harmony and prosperity ith the resumption of the regular functioning of its democratic
institutions.
In the same way, we also salute the Democratic Republic of Congo by convening the general
elections scheduled for December this year, and we formulate warm vows for them to be
trans arent and fair and conducted in a peaceful and harmonious environ ent.
On the other hand, we are pleased to note that positive steps have been taken concerning the
reconciliation processes between Ethiopia and Eritrea as well as between the belligerent parties in
the Re ublic of South Sudan, and we strongl encourage for this path to be continued.
Regarding the Sahara matter, we express our support to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and his Personal Envoy, in their efforts to relaunch the political process on the basis of the
parameters set by the Security Council in 2007, and we welcome the adoption of its resolution

2414 which calls for the need to achieve a olitical, pragmatic, realistic and long lasting solution
for the dispute.
The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe welcomes the historic developments on the
Korean Peninsula and calls on all those involved to continue the dialogue and negotiations in the
benefit of the interests of all parties, towards the development of the region.

With regard to the situation in The Middle East, we appeal for the dialogue and the continuation
of negotiations to find a peaceful and negotiated solution in respecting to the right of the Palestinian
people to conduct their own destiny, accordingly with the fundamental princi les of international
law.

In the same line, we renew our call for efforts to continue to be pursued to nonnalize the relations
between Cuba and the United States of A erica so that we can see the lifting of the trade embargo
as soon as possible, which has for decades been an obstacle to the progress of that country.
Once again, unfortunately, we must regret the terrorist acts that insist to claim so many lives around
the world. Such heinous acts, without any respect for human life, will always merit from us the
fir est and vehement condemnation. .

4

We also take this sovereign opportunity to condemn the terrorist acts of Boko Haram on the
territory of our neighbors and brothers, the Federal Republic of Nigeria, whose harmful
consequences continue to undermine the development and security of the entire Gulf of Guinea.
Likewise, we strongly condemn the terrorist acts that have caused so much suffering to the
martyred Peoples of the Sahel region, in particular the Republics of Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso.
We reaffir the strong com itment of the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe to
actively collaborate with its regional and inte ational partners in all initiatives aimed at
eradicating this phenomenon from our societies. Only by acting together can we truly build
peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies, as the theme of this session suggests.
Madam President
Ladies and Gentlemen

The leadership role of our Organization undoubtedly goes hand in hand with actions that bring
together efforts to combat climate change. Every day we are confronted with the devastating
effects of climate change around the world.
Natural disasters are occurring on a larger scale and ith greater intensity, leading to the loss of
lives, especially in the least developed regions of our planet. The global effort must continue under
the auspices of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and indeed it must
be a shared responsibility for everyone, because it is up to all of us to safeguard the future of
coming generations.
It is therefore urgent to put into practice the provisions of the Paris Agreement, so that the
necessary technical, financial and hu an resources are properly directed to ards the immensity
of the task we have in hands. We therefore call for the next Conference of the Parties, the COP 24,
which will be held in Katowice, Poland, in December, to be very successful and that the dialogue
that has been taken place could in fact make it possible to implement that agreement.
Sao Tome and Principe will do everything in its power to advocate the crucial importance of
com on and universal efforts to ado t the necessary policies in this regard.

5

Likewise, we refer to the Sustainable Development Goals, whose achievement of the established
targets, in order to really benefit everyone, ill greatly require the support of the different
specialized agencies of our Organization, in formulating and implementing the policies necessary
for its aterialization. Sao Tome Principe notes with particular appreciation what has been the
ractice in our country, where such collaboration has allowed us to. take irm steps in that direction.

We must also highlight and welcome the continued efforts of the African Union in the
implementation of the inclusive Agenda 2063, the materialization of which, we believe, will enable'
African countries to free themselves from the chains of overty, thus enabling their peoples to
have a better future. The spirit that has guided us so far must continue to be strengthened, ta ing
into account our specificities and constantly remembering what unites us: the well-being and
development of the whole of Africa.

Madam President
Ladies and Gentlemen

The Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, a small developing island state, with all the
constraints that this condition entails, pursues a policy adapted to its reality, respecting
multicultural diversity and human rights.
With an economy that is very vulnerable to exte al shocks, the Government currently in charge
has designed and has made efforts to achieve an ambitious transformation agenda for the 2030
horizon. These actions closely follow the uidelines of both the Sustainable Development Goals

and the Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
It has been a difficult task and we would like to register the support of both the Organizations, that
have closely collaborated with the Government, and our important bilateral partners, who s

support the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe widely acknowledges, and since it is
not a finished one, we would very much appreciate to continue counting on such contributions.

On next October 7, Sao Tome and Principe will hold legislative, local and regional elections. We
call on the inte ational community to join us as independent observers to once again witness the

6

strength and quality of our democracy, which will be further consolidated with this electoral act
that reveals our democratic ma urity.
Madam President
Ladies and Gentlemen

Our Organization must indeed assu e its global leadership role in the congregation of efforts for
the development of all peoples; in the unceasing pursuit of peaceful solutions to the conflicts t at
continue to exist in the world; in efforts to combat climate change; in reducing inequalities; in
promoting gender equality and equity policies; in combating the scourge of terrorism and hatred
based on race, sexual orientation and religious beliefs; in promotin intercultural dialogue among
peoples; and in the uncompromising defense of peace and human rights.
These values, hich we are sure we all share, must be continually observed and all of our efforts
must be conducive to their protection and reinforcement in a spirit of frank and open dialogue that
benefits all.
The Democratic Re ublic of Sao Tome and Principe maintains and reaffir s its unequivocal
commitment to the ideals of peace and frate ity amongst eoples, and will always collaborate
very closely so that our common problems could have common solutions and shared
responsibilities, so that we can build, under the ideals of our Organization, a more prosperous, just,
peaceful and sustainable societies.
I thank you for your attention.

7

