STATEMENT BY
H.E. R. DANNY FAURE

PRESIDENT
OF THE
REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES
AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE
DURING THE 73rd SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

25 SEPTEMBER 2018
UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS
NEW YORK

PLEASE CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Your Excellency President of the 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly,
Your Excellency, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Esteemed delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is an honour for me to address the 73rd sess on of the General Assembly the same year we mark 100
years since the great Nelson Mandela s birth, a true son and leader of not just Africa, but the world.
Madiba s legacy of democracy, equality, and peace are more relevant than ever amidst today s
growing uncertainties.

Madame President,

On behalf of the People of the Republic of Seychelles, it is a privilege to congratulate you on your
election as President of the 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly. I wish you the very
best as you discharge your important responsibilities.

I would also like to congratulate your predecessor, His Excellency Miroslav Lajcak, for his successful
leadership of the General Assembly in its 72nd Session.

I would also like to pay tribute to the statesmen and giants of history who have walked these halls,
without whom our organisation would not be what it is today - a symbol of unity and cooperation
across al I the nations in the world.

As we celebrate the anniversary of this great organisation, let us pause and reflect on the true purpose
that lies at the heart of the United Nations. We must renew our commitment to not only the Charter,
but the founding principles, which must always guide us in our deliberations and actions.

These values of cooperation are critical to the continued peace and prosperity of all our nations, and
all our peoples. We cannot let these values come under threat.
As a collective, we must continue to embrace multilateralism, which has underpinned the values of
our orga nisation for nearly three quarters of a century.

1

Seychelles continues to embrace the multilateral system that is the UN, and we fully support the
evolut on and progress that will come out of the UN reform. This reform stresses the need for a more
coordinated approach among the UN country teams to successfully deliver the 2030 Agenda and
related Sustainable De elopment Goals.

We give utmost importance to multilateral cooperation and in this spirit the Government of Seychelles
and the UN country team on the 30th of August this year, signed the first Strategic Partnership
Framework 2019-2023 which defines collective support from 18 U agencies.

Madame President,

The challenges we face in the international system remain a poignant reminder of an evolving world
to wh ch we must adapt to secure lasting peace and prosperity. Without targeted approaches that
touch the lives of our most vulnerable people, and fully embracing the promise of the SDGs, we run
the risk of leaving some behind.

Strong institutions are essential to a vibrant democracy, where there is transparency and
accountability to the people. My mandate as President of the Republic of Seychelles has been
highlighted by, in part, my desire to ensure that our institutions not only ser e the people but grant
them the necessary recourse should they feel the need. Only throu h the strengthening of institutions
and by binding ourselves to international law and norms can our people truly have accountable
governments.

I call on the advanced economies to support the strengthening of institutions in developing nations,
not through handouts, but through the sharing of expertise and best practices for the benefit of all.

Qnly through the strengthening of institut ons can we assure respect for human rights, rule of law,
and independent judiciaries, which will in turn ensure the future favours a vibrant democratic order.
Madame President,

Speaking from the standpoint of an islander, I cannot disassociate the concept of a lasting peace and
prosperity from the perils of climate chan e. Climate change has become an existential threat not only
to the li es of people in island states, but the world as a whole.

2

As islanders, we live this stark reality every day. We see its effects n our eroding coastlines and
unpredictable weather patterns. We see its effects on our coral reefs and rising sea levels.

I recognise the need for development as a driving force to lift our people out of poverty, but we need
to remain aware of its consequences on our planet and our future. Through our neglect, we risk our
children inheriting a planet beyond their capacity to repair. Should we not uphold our commitments
made, from Paris to the Fij COP23 in Bonn last year, we will reach an inescapable crisis. I believe in
the power of our collective efforts to shape a future of which we can all be proud.

In this context, I would like'to draw your attention to the theme of our 73rd session, "Making the

United Nations relevant to all people: Global leadership and shared responsibility for peaceful,
equitable and sustainable societies. The words sustainable societies has particular resonance for
Small Island Developing States.

For our United Nations to be a truly inclusive and keep up with the challenges of an ever-changing

world, Seychelles ali ns itself firmly with the African Union position callin fpr a long overdue and
comprehensive reform of the Security Council. This includes the equitable representation of Africa
which comprises, after all, more than a quarter of the members of the United Nations.

Sustainability has always been and will continue to be at the heart of the development efforts of
Seychelles. As a nation, we have shown the world our commitment to this process. Seychelles,
alongside its fellow Small Island Developing States, has been actively en a ed in this discourse to
ensure that our concerns and needs are adequately addressed.

Our nation was forged by the ocean. We are acutely a are of the challenges that poses ith the threat
of climate chan e. Flowever, the ocean also presents a myriad of untapped opportunities.

At the beginning of this year, Seychelles pioneered a Blue Economy Strategic Policy Framework and
Roadmap, to multiply the economic potential of our territorial waters whilst also protecting it for
generations to come. For us, the Blue Economy is the next frontier of development. It is about oceanbased sustainable development focusing on economic diversification, shared prosperity, food
security, and healthy and productive oceans.

3

It is encouraging to note that other like-minded states are developing this concept regardless of their
geography.

Seychelles is shifting from a dependence on bilateral aid donors to developing innovative sources of
financ n for our emerging Blue Economy. We are trying to leverage the wealth of the ocean that
surrounds us and engage in exciting new partnerships. Nevertheless, we reco nise this will not be
enough to meet our all sustainable development and climate action obli ations under the 2030
A enda, the Paris Agreement, and the SAMOA Pathway for SIDS.

This is why Seychelles is one of those Small Island Developin States that continues to advocate for a
SIDS-specific vulnerability and resilience index, which would take into account the unique
vulnerabilities and specificities of Small Island Developing States and better reflect the realities that
we face. The agenda of Small Island Developing States is inextricably linked to that of humanity s.

Madame President,

The United Nations was born of the horrors of a destructive world war. It was charged with upholding
the idea that, as a collective, our differences could be resolved through dialogue and international
diplomacy.

To ether, we continue to demonstrate the success and unrelenting power of diplomacy, and in the
case of the smaller states like ours, we have also proven that might is not right. In this unique forum,
we have equal representation.

Seychelles remains committed to the ideals of the United Nations and will remain an active voice
within this organisation. Today, we are presented with a unique opportunity to transform our world
through our collective efforts, and create lasting partnerships.

We have a unique opportunity to sculpt a future for our children they can be proud to inherit. Let us
be on the right side of history and live up to the ideals upon which this or anisation was born.

Thank you.

4

