PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF
SIERRA LEONE TO THE UNITED NATIONS
336 East 45th St., £lth Floor • New York, NY 10017

STATEMENT

by

His Excellency Mr. Julius Maada Bio
President of the Republic of Sierra Leone
at the

73^^ Session of the United Nations General Assembly

Thursday 27*^ September 2018

New York

Please check against delivery

Madam President,
Colleague Heads of State and Government,
Distinguished Delegates,
It is a distinct honour for me to address this august assembly for the very first time
as President of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
I warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on your election as President of the
73*"^ Session of the United Nations General Assembly. I want to assure you of my
country's fullest support and cooperation during your tenure.
I commend your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Miroslav Lajcak of Serbia for his
sterling leadership during the 72"^ Session. I would also like to commend the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his dedication and
commitment to the pursuit of world peace and development.

On behalf of the Government and people of Sierra Leone, I extend heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of Ghana and to the United Nations
family on the passing of Mr. Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the United
Nations. He served humanity and the world with distinction, and in our country's
hour of need, he helped steer our nation out of the deep abyss of seemingly
intractable war. May he rest in perfect peace. He always showed us what is possible
and what is best in humanity.

Madam President,
Our commitment to building a peaceful and more secure world, as espoused in the
United Nations Charter, as well as, our commitment to the implementation of
Agenda 2030, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, and on-going reform
processes of the United Nations, resonates with the theme ^^Making the United
Nations Relevant to all People: Global Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for
Feacefuly Equitable and Sustainable Societies.

The work of the United Nations

should continue to be guided by the values on which it was founded, including,
promoting peace, security, human rights, equality of all nations, and the promotion
of social progress and better standards of life.

Madam President,

In April this year. Sierra Leoneans registered their commitment to democratic
governance with yet another peaceful transfer of power from an incumbent

political party to the opposition. We acknowledge with humility the many
messages of commendation from various parts of the world for conducting
peaceful and credible Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Councils Elections,

which led to my election as President. On behalf of the people of Sierra Leone, we
sincerely appreciate invaluable contributions of the international community in
facihtating and monitoring our electoral process. We acknowledge the role of the
United Nations and our development partners for supporting the successful
conduct of those elections. We are a successful model of a stable democracy - one
that has evolved and matured in 20 years from the chaos and lawlessness of civil
conflict.

But stable democracies must be sustainable. Sierra Leoneans voted for a change of
Government; they voted for a new direction and the right direction. My
Government is ready to maximize our country's potential for development because
we believe that development sustains emerging, successful, and stable democracies
like ours. The international community has invested hugely in facilitating and
stabilizing Sierra Leone's democracy. The international community must continue
to play its role in sustaining Sierra Leone's democracy in collaboration with the
Government and people of Sierra Leone. In particular, we acknowledge the
support of UNDF and UNCDF for their support for our economic transformation.

In addition to our firm commitment to good governance and prudent and
accountable management of our nation's resources, we are ready to foster a
conducive and congenial environment for credible GDP growth. We call on our
bilateral partners to help us deliver on the expectations of our people with
development funds, technical assistance, and the cultivation of valuable trade
links. We cordially invite all credible investors into an open and congenial
investment environment where all your investments are guaranteed and protected
by our relevant laws and where we have worked assiduously to remove barriers to
investment. Help us to sustain our stable democracy.

Madam President,
This Assembly made a historic pledge during the World Summit held in 2005: A
pledge ^ strengthen the United Nations with a view to enhancing its authority
andefficiency, as wellasits capacityto address effectively, andin accordance with
the purposes andprinciples of the Charter, the full range of challenges of our
time".

A number of gains have been made, including the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights Council, and the adoption of the
resolution on Responsibility to Protect. These gains are laudable, but the need for
reform is urgent and imperative. We should now endeavor to demonstrate the
political will to particularly redress the historical injustice done to the African
continent.

The present geopolitical realities are compelling for a comprehensive reform of the
Security Council to make way for equitable representation in all Organs of the
United Nations.

Africa is the only region without representation in the Permanent category of the
Security Council. Africa is also under-represented in the Non-permanent category.
Africa's demand for two Permanent seats with all the rights and prerogatives of
current members, including the right of veto, and two additional Non-permanent
seats is a matter of common justice, and the right to have an equal say in decisionmaking on issues that affect the AjPrican region. It is time that we addressed this
longstanding injustice and imbalance perpetuated in the present configuration of
the Security Council without any further delay. Africa is committed to on-going
reforms that will make the United Nations fit for purpose.
As the Coordinator of the African Union Committee of Ten Heads of State and

Government on the reform of the United Nations, we reiterate our concern over
the continuous inaction of this body to adopt measures that will lead to Africa
taking its rightful place in the Security Council. Unless we are able to contend with
the reform of the Security Council - the most critical question of the day - our

organization will be seemingly constituted on undemocratic and discriminatory
principles.

Let me reiterate the urgent need for comprehensive reform of the Security Council.
1.2 billion of the world's population of 7.5 billion are African. 1.2 billion of the

world's population continues to contribute its fair share to maintaining world
peace and security. About 70% of the decisions made at the UN Security Council
ultimately affect those 1.2 billion Africans. Those 1.2 billion people are affected by
over 70% of the UN's resolutions. 1.2 billion of the world's population therefore
asks why it should be excluded from representation on the UN Security Council.
Those 1.2 billion people simply want their voices to be fully represented on the UN
Security Council.

Madam President,
My Government's blueprint document for moving our country forward - the
"New Direction" - focuses on taking Sierra Leone beyond the phase of
peacebuilding and consolidation to firmly establishing a stable, peaceful, open, and
pluralistic democracy that is a responsible and committed member of the
community of nations.

Atthe domestic level, my Government has established priority areas including job
creation; access to quality education; youth empowerment, empowerment of
women and the disabled; combating graft and corruption and fostering a culture

of accountability and transparency; ensuring effective and efficient public service
delivery; and strengthening civic responsibility and national cohesion.

Guided by both our specific situation and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
our governance initiative and policy actions involve strengthening our democratic
institutions, opening up democratic spaces, promoting democratic dialogues, and
creating a more just and equal society. We see these as precursors for the
sustainable growth of our economy and our development as a nation.
My Government's economic and development policies, as I stated inter-alia, create
a congenial environment for credible private sector investment and
entrepreneurship. We are eager to work with and listen to the private sector. Our
policies are enabling and our investment framework is attractive. We can ensure
the full legal protection of all investments and we can ensure predictable and
profitable revenue streams and returns on investments.

Sierra Leone is at the beginning of adopting renewable energy. We now need
public and private investment for commercial and industrial use, powering hotels,
agriculture, and small-scale manufacturing. My country is endowed with
significant renewable energy resources in solar irradiation, coastal and offshore
wind, mini-hydro, and bioenergy. My Government's target of 60% renewable
energy capacity by 2030 is practicable especially to generate growth in rural areas.
Our country, like most developing countries, has been on the expensive and dirty

hquid fuel treadmill since independence. My government is seeing international
technical assistance and capacity building for migrating a percentage of my
country's power-generation away from heavy liquid fuel to liquid natural gas
(LNG) trucked to site. My government is seeking collaboration between local
companies and US engineering companies that have proven experience in working
on PowerAfrica funded LNG-Fower projects in Africa. We believe that investment

in renewable energy sources and LNG will help us meet SDG 7 by modernizing
our energy generation systems and this will have a multiplier effect in helping our
country meet SDGs for poverty alleviation through job creation and increased
investments, health delivery, water, and cities. We are determined to make Sierra

Leone the renewable energy hub of the EGOWAS regional block. Our vision is good
for our world's climate, good for foreign and local investors and development, and
good for our country.
My Government has a bold vision for science, technology, and innovation. I have
established the first Directorate of Science technology, and Innovation We have set
a bold and achievable target of 2025 for developing solid ICT infrastructure that
will support graft-free governance and the delivery of effective, reliable,
responsive, and transparent services from banking and business to education.

agricultural extension, revenue collection, healthcare delivery, access to justice,
governance, tourism, trade, and the rule of law.
Madam President,
We have undertaken extensive reforms in line with SDG 16 plus to create a
peaceful, just, and inclusive Sierra Leone with resilient institutions. We are
engaged in judiciary and criminal justice reform and in collaboration with civil
society and partner organizations, we continue to build on gains injustice delivery
that take into account disparities in access to justice. We have launched a focused
and sustained campaign against graft and waste and misuse of public funds. Our
National Revenue Authority has streamlined revenue collection and reduced tax
evasion and theft. We have launched a free quality education programme that
provides access to basic through secondary education for the girl child and other
children of school-going age. We are building, re-tooling, and opening up our
governance, healthcare, financial, and other institutions to empower our women,
young persons, the aged, and disabled compatriots. We are also reviewing
discriminatory laws and practices and we will engage communities in order to
change traditional strictures that have excluded those persons. In particular, our
young people, like young people the world over are energized and eager to make
Sierra Leone a better place. Our development policies and priorities harness their
vibrancy and direct it into targeted education and skills training, entrepreneurship,
and strong civic participation.
We are working toward a comprehensive biometric identification system so that
all citizens can fully participate in the economic and civic life of our nation. In
particular, we acknowledge the support of UNDP, KIVA and UNCDF in
strengthening our National Digital Identification System. Their assistance
modernizes our credit reference bureau that will radically transform the financial
inclusion landscape and the ease of doing business in our country.

We are fully committed to promoting a free press, rescinding adversarial public
order laws, and protecting and promoting the right of citizens to know and to
access information. We have instituted a national civic education commission to

further ensure the unrestricted participation of every Sierra Leonean in our stable
democracy. For all of the foregoing, we need a constructive but intensive and
sustained engagement with our bilateral partners and partner institutions.
Madam President,
My Government is committed to increasing equitable access to quality healthcare
for Sierra Leoneans. We call on bilateral partners, organizations, private persons
to help us invest in and also develop our critical institutional, technical, human

resource capacity, as well as develop infrastructure that ensures the delivery of
quality healthcare for Sierra Leoneans. We recall with great appreciation the
magnanimity of the world as we dealt with recent deadly epidemics like the Ebola
virus disease, and the sustained interventions of our partners in helping us battle
tropical diseases including malaria, cholera, and typhoid. We need more help in
all those areas and in expanding and maintaining all immtmization levels at a
100%. My government has increased healthcare investment. But that will not be
enough. We call on the international commimity to enhance our institutional and
technical capacity for preventative healthcare, and for managing public health and
environmental sanitation issues including waste management and storm drain
water management in urban areas.
Madam President,
Sierra Leone welcomes the UN's renewed commitment to conflict prevention as

embodied in its Charter. The world, more now than ever before, needs a stronger
United Nations and consistent and effective multilateralism that collectively
ponders and cooperatively resolves mankind's common challenges from trade to
climate change, and from world security to our common humanity, and our
collective social and economic well-being. Our foreign policy should be driven by
the golden rule, impartiality, and cooperation. This is the only way humanity can
respond effectively, without hesitation, to the global challenges that we face.
We acknowledge the continued relevance of the Programme of Action and the
International Tracing Instrument, which constitutes the global framework to
prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in
all its aspects. We welcome the Secretary-General's reform agenda in sustaining
peace, including the efforts to reform peacekeeping as one of the most effective
tools available to the UN in the promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security. My Government will bolster Sierra Leone's participation in the
promotion and maintenance of international peace and security as a Troop and
Police Contributing Country and supporting UN peacekeeping operations,
especially with the deployments of formed units or contingents of both military
and police. Sierra Leone stands ready to continue contributing to world peace and
security.

Madam President,

With a strong belief in a shared vision and a common destiny. Sierra Leoneans
stand with the world in meeting the world's challenges. Sierra Leoneans equally
look to the world for all the help the world can offer to help consolidate Sierra
Leone into an economically developed, open, inclusive, and pluralistic democracy.
We are "one, with a faith that wisdom inspires; one, with a zeal that never tires."

.

»

r

We are optimistic because our country stands ready on the threshold of a newdirection.

I thank you for your attention.

