Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore
UNITED NATIONS I NEW YORK

UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
73rd SESSION

GENERAL DEBATE

STATEMENT BY

HIS EXCELLENCY DR VIVIAN BALAKRISHNAN
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
OF THE REPBULIC OF SINGAPORE

29 SEPTEMBER 2018

Please check against delivery

318 East 48th Street, New York, NY 10017, United States of America i T +1 (212) 826 0840 F +1 (212) 826 2964 I mfa.gov.sg/newyork

SPEECH BY MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS
OF THE REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
• DR VIVIAN BALAKRISHNAN

AT THE
73rd SESSION OF THE UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY
NEW YORK, 29 SEPTEMBER 2018
Madam President
Excellencies

Distinguished delegates
1. I congratulate Her Excellency Maria Fernanda Espinosa of Ecuador
on her election as President of the 73rd session of the General Assembly. I also
thank His Excellency Miroslav Lajcak, the Foreign Minister of Slovakia, for his
leadership of the 72nd session.
Madam President,
2. Multilateralism is at a crossroads. In recent years, we have

witnessed a crisis of confidence in the concept of multilateralism and its
institutions. Whether in trade, security or dispute resolution, questions have
arisen about whether the multilateral system can continue to deliver ef ective
solutions for our problems. As a small, open and trade-dependent state,

Singapore has watched this recent retreat from multilateralism with grave
conce . This is why I want to mount a defence of multilateralism today. There
is perhaps no better forum for me to make this argument than here at the UN, the
ultimate bastion of multilateralism.
3. It is easy to understand why there is a resurgence in isolationist,
protectionist and xenophobic sentiments in the political arena all over the world.
We are living in volatile, uncertain and disruptive times. The digital revolution is
increasingly disrupting the way we live, work, play, communicate and organise
our societies. Non-state actors and transboundary threats such as terrorism,

infectious pandemics and climate change remain a clear and present danger.
Frontier issues such as artificial intelligence and cybercrime have leapt from the
pages of science fiction. Social cohesion is breaking down.

4. At the same time, the international order as we know it is also being
disrupted. Since 1945, many countries and regions have benefitted from the open

1

and inclusive global order that was substantially underwritten by a single power
- the United States. Today, we are transitioning into a multipolar world, where
other powers are starting to assume a greater role in various spheres. This is a
transition that has to be managed carefully.
Importance of Rules-Based Multilateral System
5. I am not saying that multilateralism is perfect. In fact, we need to
recognise that it hasn t always fulfilled all its promises. And sometimes, it has
been over-sold as a panacea. How then do we make multilateralism wor in this
shifting geostrategic context?
6. My take is that every state has to make room to accommodate new
realities and find a new modus vivendi. Foreign policy and trade policy always
begin at home. Politics is always local. The global order will need to evolve and
our roles and responsibilities will need to be rebalanced. In this perilous period
of transition, we cannot and should not abandon the mles-based world order that
has brought about unprecedented peace and prosperity for 70 years.
7. In fact, the scale and transboundary nature of the challenges we face
today demand more cohesion nd cooperation. There is a strong case to be made
for doubling down on multilateralism, rather than retreating from it. We need a
clear framework of rules and norms to ensure predictability and stability in inter¬
state relations and commerce. Defining these mles through a multilateral process
in which all States engage one another as equals, is necessary to build consensus
and respect for the rule of law.
8. Compliance with the agreed rules by all states is not only essential
for global stability and the governing of the global commons, but is especially
important to small states such as Singapore. The principle that agreements will
be respected and implemented is fundamental for our survival. Without the rule
of law, the strong do what they will, and the weak suffer what they must . Small
states like Singapore will not survive in such a world. That is why Singapore has
been a staunch defender of the UN, inte ational law and the multilateral system.
9. Take trade for example. Globalisation has not benefitted everyone
equally. Pockets of poverty and hunger continue to persist around the world. Our
people are worried about jobs. Unfortunately, the conventional arguments in
favour of free trade, economic integration, and cooperation between countries
have gone out of fashion. Today, trade frictions between the US and China have
raised the spectre of a trade war.

2

10. We cannot simply blame globalisation. Govern e ts of the day
have an obligation to consider long-term and sustainable solutions, instead ofjust
raising trade barriers. For example, to truly address widening inequality and
wage stagnation, we must address its root causes. In the midst, of the digital
revolution, we must ensure that our people have the right skills for new emerging
jobs. It is futile to fight to protect obsolete technologies and yesterday s jobs. On
the contrary, we must try to take advantage of the new opportunities of the global
market to create the jobs of the future. It is thus our responsibility, as
govern ents, to actively put in place policies to train, retool and reskill our
citizens by investing in infrastructure, training and education. This is why
Singapore is restructuring our education system. We are putting in serious money
to enable our people to continuously upgrade and learn new skills through a
programme we call SkillsFuture. Our focus is to restructure our economy - to

identify and work with the private sector to transform jobs, enhance our
competitiveness and elevate productivity. This is fundamentally an investment in
our people to make sure that they are ready for the future.
11. Ultimately, no country benefits from trade conflicts and
protectionism. The negative impacts will ripple through the global supply chain
and undermine growth and prosperity in all countries. At a time of increasing
inter-connectedne and inter-dependence, it is now more than ever that we need

a multilateral approach and strong mles. Singapore will continue to be a strong
supporter of the rules-based multilateral trading system. The critical importance
of the World Trade Organisation camiot be over-emphasised, as the neutral
arbiter of inte ational trade disputes.
Developing Rules and Norms to Govern Cyberspace
12. Another area where we urgently need to promote the adoption and
implementation of mles and norms is in cyberspace. To reap the full benefits of
digital technologies, we must develop a tmsted and open cyberspace underpinned
by inte ational law and well-defined nor s of responsible State behaviour.
13. The Inte ational Telecommunications Union ranked Singapore as
the country most committed to cybersecurity in its 2017 Global Cybersecurity
Index. Yet, in July this year, one of Singapore’s health databases was subject to
an advanced persistent threat. This was a deliberate, targeted and sophisticated
cyber-attack. This shows that no country is i mune to cyber-attacks.

14. All states must work together to implement norms and rales
prohibiting such attacks on critical infrastructure. As the only universal,
inclusive, multilateral forarp, States have always turned to the UN to develop the
rales that gove the global commons. One example is the UN Convention on

3

the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which provides the global legal framework for
all activities in the oceans and seas.
15. Just as we supported the UNCLOS process, Singapore stands ready
to contribute to the UN s work to develop and adopt norms and rules on
cybersecurity. To this end, we support the reconvening of the UN Group of
Governmental Experts (GGE) and the continuation of its work in developing the
norms of state behaviour in cyberspace.
16. Cybersecurity has been a priority under Singapore’s chairmanship

of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). At the 3rd ASEAN
Mini terial Conference on Cybersecurity in Singapore last week, ASEAN agreed
to subscribe in-principle to the 11 norms in the UN GGE’s 2015 Report.
17. Singapore is also committed to capacity building which is essential
for States to effectively implement rules and norms of state behaviour. Singapore
will launch an ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity Centre of Excellence in 2019.

We have also partnered with the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA)
on a U -Singapore Cyber Programme to raise awareness and build capacity in
our region.

Regional Cooperation in support of multilateralism: ASEAN
18. Our work in ASEAN is rooted in our belief that regional
organisations can demonstrate how multilateralism can continue to be relevant
and beneficial to all our peoples.

19. As the ASEAN Chair this year, Singapore will continue to work with
ASEAN Member States and our exte al partners to ensure that the regional
architecture remains open, inclusive and mles-based.

20. We are w rking with our partners to conclude the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP). When concluded, the RCEP will
be the world’s largest trading bloc, covering a third of the world’s GDP. But this
is not just about big trade figures. It will send a powerful message that ASEAN
Member States and our partners are committed to free trade, regional integration
and inte ational cooperation.
21. ASEAN Member States are also working together to leverage the
digital revolution for our peoples’ benefit. We established the ASEAN Smart

Cities Network (ASCN) at the 32nd ASEAN Summit in April. The ASCN
focuses on ensuring interoperability and integration of services, and allows cities
in the region to share experiences, exchange solutions and lessons leamt. We have

4

just concluded an ASEAN Agreement on streamlining e-commerce regulations
so that businesses can market and sell their products easily within ASEAN.
22. ASEAN Member States are also committed to the peacef l
resolution of disputes through multilateral processes. The situation in Rakhine
State in Myanmar is a grave conce . The crisis is complex and deep-rooted and
will not be resolved ove ight. There are accounts of brutal and shocking
atrocities. We condemn all human rights violations. We expect the Independent
Commission of Enquiry established by the Government of Myanmar to carry out
impartial investigations expeditiously and hold those responsible fully
accountable. The voluntary return of displaced persons to Myanmar in a safe,
secure and dignified way should commence without undue delay. Ultimately, a
political solution needs to be found, involving reconciliation, fairness, justice, and
better prospects for all communities. Only then can there be a durable solution to
this complex inter-communal problem.

Singapore s contributions to support the UN and multilateralism
23. We have all been watching developments on the Korean Peninsula
with concern. This year, Singapore was able to make a small contribution towards
easing tensions when we hosted the Summit between the US and DPRK leaders
in June. The Summit, as well as the three inter-Korean dialogues held this year,
are important steps towards lasting peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula.
Singapore hopes that dialogue and efforts towards peace will continue.
24. Let me conclude by saying that there is no doubt that multilateralism
needs to be defended and the UN strengthened to deal with complex global
challenges. As members of the UN, we each have a responsibility to work
together, to improve and adapt the multilateral system we have built painstakingly
over the last seven decades. We owe it to our people to find solutions and to build
consensus, so that our people can lead better lives. Ultimately, a rules-based
multilateral system is indispensable to secure peace and prosperity for our people
and our planet.

5

