STATEMENT BY

H. E. Mr. ANDREJ KISKA

PRESIDENT

OF THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

IN THE GENERAL DEBATE

OF THE 73^^ SESSION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

Madam President of the General Assembly,

Mr. Secretary-General,

Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen,

It takes decades to build peace and trust. But it takes seconds,
one selfish or narrow-minded decision, to break them.

We gather here every year to enhance what we have been
building for over 70 years. An idea of world based on rules and
principles of humanity, responsibility, tolerance, and peaceful
coexistence. Where wars and armed conflicts have no place.

Where disputes are solved in dialogue. And where challenges are
addressed in cooperation.

We are continually becoming wealthier and more advanced.
With all the resources we can generate together, we may have all
the means to reach even the poorest of the poor. And yet, we are

more often driven by selfishness and short-term interests. Instead
of enlarging freedom, cooperation and healthy competition,
we introduce restrictions and trade wars.

While globalisation has created unprecedented wealth,
inequalities are still dividing this planet. The economic figures are

positive, but they get hardly translated into improved well-being
and dignity of every human being in many parts of our world.

In an amazing pace we continue developing technologies which
allow us to connect, communicate and be closer globally.
But the distance between people, the gap in understanding and
empathy towards other cultures are still huge.

And yet, thanks to innovations the world has never been smaller.
What happens thousands of kilometers far from us can turn into a

global problem in a matter of minutes. The global problems have
direct impacts on our citizens. In this situation, the United

Nations plays an irreplaceable role. It has an enormous potential
to overcome these paradoxes. Its strong principles, responsible
action and the driver for cooperation are what makes it
so unique.

Let me touch upon these in more detail.

THE RULES AND PRINCIPLES and their enforcement must

remain a backbone of this organization. Because today it seems

that playing by the rules have become old-fashioned. As if ignoring
them was a sign of strength. And respect a sign of weakness.

The number of armed conflicts has increased in the recent years.

Only in 2016 and 2017 the number of conflicts reached the peaks
of the Cold War era. The civilian casualties rise. We are talking

about hundreds of thousands of innocent people directly affected
by conflicts and wars.

Sovereignty and territorial integrity are the DNA of stability
and security — globally and regionally. But the occupation of
Georgia and Ukraine and destabilisation in the region are just one

of many examples that the respect of rules is being replaced
by ruthless power politics.

The threat of nuclear weapons resonates much more often than

we could have imagined in the past years. We hope that
the current developments in North Korea will bring tangible
results. We must make sure the agreements will be kept.
And if not, we need to act with resolve.

Too often we see thousands of civilians massacred by their very

own regimes or in endless conflicts. As if we became immune
to the breaching of the very norms of humanity and stopped
counting the innocent lives in Syria, Yemen, Palestine, Myanmar,
South Sudan and elsewhere.

Together we have agreed that using the weapons of mass
destruction will be unacceptable without exceptions. Any use of
chemical weapons must be a red line to our tolerance.

An automatic trigger for resolute actions. So it is shameful to see
repeated use of chemical weapons against own citizens

for the sake of survival of a tyranny in Syria. Or for us, Europeans,

shockingly, the attacks in Salisbury in Great Britain with
the perpetrators avoiding responsibility and shamelessly denying
facts.

It is our RESPONSIBILITY to make sure that no perpetrator will

escape unpunished. We must firmly show that we do not bent our
principles to aggressive politics. That we will not undermine
the authority of this organization by inaction.

We have a great responsibility towards our citizens, towards
international community and this planet. To lead, to stand firmly
behind our values, to defend them. We must listen to our people

to address their problems. But also to see far enough to inspire
them.

Particularly vis-a-vis extremism, populism, radicalism,

xenophobia or racism. Propaganda, lies and twisted truths.
Or terrorism. Their goals are simple and yet effective — to spread
fear, hatred and doubts. To erode our beliefs and values.

To undermine our unity. They provide seemingly quick and

simple solutions provoking confrontation and drawing dividing
lines.

It is no surprise they find a fertile soil everywhere we fail to
deliver. People living in poverty, starving of hunger or diseases,
with no access to education or health care, are one of their natural

targets. And we will not win this fight if we do not offer these

people and their children a hope to live a better life in dignity,
free of fear of hunger or death.

That is why our unity in implementing the development goals,
in fighting the climate change or addressing migration is
so important. We need to turn our plans and our promises into

a global reality. Failing to do so only sends a signal of our
weakness, leaving these people and this planet as an easy prey.

8

Unprecedented progress in innovations and new technologies

brings new challenges. I am very much concerned about malicious
activities in cyber space. Growing manipulation in social media
is undermining democracy worldwide and indoctrinating our
populations.

Cyber space knows no borders. It is anonymous and provides
unlimited room to strike at us. The choice of means is endless.

To manipulate elections, to influence decisions. To spy on us or
sneak into our computers, networks and everyday lives. It is

as dangerous as any conventional threat. As such it requires our
utmost attention. But we don't do anything yet or barely a little.

The global companies prefer their profits to their responsibilities.

So it is up to us, the states, to set new standards and where
needed, regulations. Because today we donT lead. We only follow.
And the price of inaction may be soon very high.

Too often, we hear political leaders calling to fight extremism and

propaganda with the same tools and rhetorics. They can't be more
wrong. The only honest answer is to support tolerance, freedom
of speech and critical thinking in our societies. The only potent
defense is to reinforce our values and to bring candid solutions

to people's problems. Only when we deliver, our electoral
constituencies may become immune to extremist ideas and
propaganda.

In this effort, we need to remember that free media are our allies

not enemies. They are guardians of our principles. They are often

the first to spot when things go in the wrong direction. They keep
those, who break the rules, accountable.

10

Thus we should be very much worried about increased attacks

on journalists, attempts to eliminate the freedom of press and

growing restrictions on civil societies. Sadly, last year dozens of
journalists were killed. Hundreds were imprisoned and thousands
oppressed. The climate of hate continues to spread portraying
them as enemies of the state, as the enemies of nation or faith.

But they play a key role in our mission for the better world.
And as such they must be protected.

11

COOPERATION

None of our countries, even the most powerful ones, is big enough
to face the current challenges on its own. Be it migration,

terrorism, climate change or solid economic growth.

While our most important duty of us, the politicians, is to serve

our people, it will only be possible if we truly understand the
value of cooperation. If we understand that if we truly want to

change this world and this planet for better, we need to think of
others - individuals, nations, and countries.

And patiently explain this principle to our people.

12

As Kofi Annan said: "More than ever before in human history,
we share a common destiny. We can master it only ifweface it

together. And that, myfriends, is why we have the United Nations."

I admit that multilateralism is not always an easy way. But it is

the only sustainable one. The United Nations will serve its
purpose as long as we, the member states, stand true to our
commitments. For as long as we respect the rules and principles
and will be ready to defend them.

Because the noble idea and strong principles of this organization

the true values of tolerance, empathy, compassion and solidarity

are the best equipment for us to face any challenge.

If we protect these values — the moral compass of humanity,
then the evil of aggressive power politics, selfish nationalism,
extremism or racism shall not prevail.

13

We may not know what comes tomorrow. But we may know how
to respond if we let the moral compass guide us. And it is the best
assurance we can have in the times of uncertainty. To protect our
values.

Madam President,

1wish to conclude by congratulating you on your assumption of

the Presidency. The challenges 1spoke about are not easy to
tackle. But 1 have full confidence in the United Nations and your

office that you will steer this Assembly through these times with
utmost dedication to fulfill our common goals.

For what 1also wish to proudly thank and congratulate to your

predecessor Mr. Miroslav Lajcak — for a professionalism with
which he served the United Nations and its peoples.

Thank you.

