SOLOMON ISLANDS GOVERNMENT ¦
Statement by the Hon. Rick N. Houenipwela, MP

73rd UNITED NATIONS GENER L ASSEMBLY DEB TE
Making the United N tions relevant to all people: Global
leadership and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable
and sustainable societies

Friday, 28th September, 2018
New York
l

Madam President
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

At the outset, allow me, on behalf of My Government and the People of Solomon
Islands, to con ey our warmest greetings, to you Madam President and the
members of this august Assembly..

Our warmest congratulations to you Madam President/on your election as

President of the 73rd session of the General Assembly. I am confident, that
under your leadership, you will ably guide our deliberations during this current
session. Madam President, I assure you of my delegation s full support and
cooperation during your tenure in Office.

I also commend and thank your predecessor His Excellency Miroslav Lajcak, for
his sterling stewardship of the 72nd session of the General Assembly, and, we
thank him for his leadership.

Solomon Islands also joins other members in mourning the loss of the Late Koffi
Anan, Former Secretary General of the United Nations and a proud son of Ghana
and Africa. We acknowledge his immense contributions to the work of our
organisation. The Late Kofi Anan was truly a global statesman.

Madam President, I welcome the theme chosen for this session. It reflects the

ultimate goal that this august body strives to achieve. Making the United

Nations relevant to all people: Global leadership and shared responsibilities for
peaceful equitable and sustainable societies.

2

This is indeed a powerful theme. It speaks of a united world with both equal
responsibilities and equal opportunities. It also speaks of the need to be united

in achieving peace and tranquillity amongst all our Nations and peoples.

Indeed, Madam President, the implementation of the SDGs requires a unified
global partnership and the concerted joint efforts of all stakeholders to mobilize
all available resources to achieve these SDGs.

It recognises that by being together we can conquer the inequities of today that
have befallen us, be it man-made or natural. It also reflects the preamble of the

UN Charter which speaks powerfully of our mission to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the
equal rights of men and women, and of nations large and small."

Our preamble clearly articulates the principle of universality, for all peoples
and all nations regardless of their size.

Madam President, the world has, unfortunately, entered an era, in which the

foundation and strengths of multilateralism is being challenged and
undermined by unilateral state posturing and manoeuvres.

We have seen a proliferation of insular focussed policies by some countries,
causing them to renege on their commitments under various international
frameworks and treaties.

3

The United Nations allows us to consolidate our collective resolve and

solidarity for maintenance of international peace and security; promote
sustainable development advance respect for Human rights and promote the
rule of law.

SDGs
Madam President, Solomon Islands reaffirms its commitment to achieving the

SDGs by 2030.

To this end, we have incorporated the SDGs into our National Development
Strategy 2016-2035.

We also welcome the mid-term review of the Small Islands Developing States

(SIDS] Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway.

It is my hope, that the outcomes of the review will provide the impetus needed
to reinvigorate the speci l case for SIDS going forward. The review should also
ensure that all partners and stakeholders, together with SIDS, address, more

effectively, challenges faced by SIDS and take full advantage of the
opportunities through genuine and durable partnerships.

Solomon Islands acknowledges, that achieving the SDGs will be an arduous and
challenging task. However, it is a path that we must trek. We welcome all the
assistance and support from our development partners towards this cause.

LDC

4

Madame President, this year Solomon Islands met two of the three criterions
for LDC graduation, for the second consecutive time. The Committee on

Development Policy recommended that Solomon Islands graduate from the list
of LDCs. The Economic and Social Council [ECOSOC], has also recommendation
that this august body consider and endorse our graduation accordingly.

While my government appreciates the report and its recommendations, I must
point out that as a post-conflict state, Solomon Islands will require the
development of appropriate prudent macroeconomic and fin nce policies to

maintain the threshold indicators upon which the recommendation for
graduation is premised.

It is therefore my fervent hope that this Assembly will grant Solomon Islands
an opportunity to properly assess the potential impacts of LDC graduation on
key sectors which sustain our economy. A predictable and workable strategy

that would put us on a continued upward trajectory, will need to be developed
as well.

I call on the United Nations system to support us in these assessments and in
the development of appropriate strategies that would assist us to boldly move
forward with confidence.

The Solomon Islands Government respects the process of graduation that is
based on an agreed rules-based system and will endeavour to graduate from
he LDC status. However, any appropriate and relev nt assessment undertaken
of the country must be well-conceived, thorough, and consultative. As you are

aware, graduation from LDC status of SIDS such as Solomon Islands will not

5

improve our vulnerabilities. To that end we are pleased to know that a special
taskforce has been established to ensure a smooth transition of SIDS from LDC.

Climate Change

Madam President, whilst we in Solomon Islands are not subject to threats of an
armed invasion, we are nevertheless continuously being invaded by a common

enemy that we call Climate Change .

Climate change is the greatest threat facing humankind. For us in the Pacific
Islands this threat is existential. The resulting climate change related extreme
weather events means that Solomon Islands is more susceptible to natural
disasters of greater severity.

The threat of sea level rise, as well as inundation and salination of arable land,

the destruction of biodiversity, including through a warming ocean and
acidification, are ingredients for the causation of food security concerns and
increase the risk of potential conflicts.

In light of this threat, Solomon Islands calls for collective lobal leadership in
climate change action and for strengthened commitment towards positive
outcomes in COP24 in Katowice, Poland, this year.

Solomon Islands joins other Pacific Islands States in strongly urging the largest
emitters of Green House Gasses to take urgent actions in reducing this harmful
emission. Reduce now or regret later.

6

In the ongoing dialogue on the Climate challenge appropriate financial support
to SIDS address their loss and dama e resulting from destructive effects of
climate change, must be seriously considered.

In our efforts to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and meet our intended

nationally determined contributions [NDCs], Solomon Islands remains
committed to transitioning to the use of renewable energy.

On behalf of my government and people of Solomon Islands, I extend our
gratitude to our partners, including the Asian Development Bank, World Bank,
the Green Climate Fund, the Economic Development Cooperation Fund of Korea
and Australi n Development Assistance, for their financial assistance and

support towards the Tina Hydro Dam project. This project when completed will
cater for some 80% of the Capital, Honiara s power consumption needs.

I acknowledge the bilateral assistance provided by the Governments of Italy,
Spain, Austria and Luxemburg towards the Pacific Small Island Developing
States, including Solomon Islands, to support renewable energy projects. We
look forward to continuing the partnerships in the coming years.

Madam President, adequate and quality infrastructure is a prerequisite for
positive economic and inclusive growth. Investment in infrastructure projects

positively impacts on a majority of the population and enhances accessibility to
goods and services, both private and public.

In this connection, Solomon Islands is grateful to the Government and People
of Japan in the transformative development ofmajor infrastructures such as the

7

Honiara City main roads, Honiara Sea Port and the proposed upgrade of
Honiara International Airport.

The opening of the second international airport in Munda, and the undersea
fibre optic cable are also game ch nging infr structures, for which the people

and Government of Solomon Islands are grateful for this valuable assistance
from Australia and New Zealand.

Cooperation
Solomon Islands has benefited through South-South cooperation on capacity
development programs with countries such as Papua New Guinea, Fiji and
Cuba, including the potential to explore other innovative opportunities such as
pharmaceutical solutions.

The People of Solomon Islands are forever grateful to all our development
partners for the genuine and durable partnerships. We will collaborate and
increase efforts going forward.

Oceans
Madam President, as a large ocean state, the issue of conservation and proper
management of ocean resources, is an important priority for Solomon Islands.
We will ac ively engage on matters concerning the management of oceans.

With regard to oceans management on the high seas, my Government
welcomes, the recent first intergovernmental conference to negotiate a legally
binding instrument, under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea

(UNCLOS), concerning areas of Biodiversity Beyond National Jurisdiction.

8

A successful outcome of fair and equitable framework will again prove the
relevance of this organization and its convening powers.

At the regional level, Solomon Islands subscribes to the Blue Pacific Initiative
which sets the context for the development of our regional priorities.

We believe that maintaining the wellbeing of the oceans should be a key priority
as acknowledged in SDG14. Restoration of fish stocks, implementation of
science-based management measures, monitoring, control and enforcement

are but some of the measures which Solomon Islands is promoting through
domestic and regional arrangements.

At the national level, I am pleased to inform the Assembly that we are in the
final stages of developing an Ocean policy that will rationalize, enhance
coordination and support implementation of all ocean-related legislations and

policies. The development of the National Policy is a voluntary commitment
that we announced at last year s ocean conference.

Madam President, security concerns have become more complex. It now
involves activities beyond traditional definitions. Some of these now include
new threats such as climate change, cybercrimes, transnat onal organised
crime and so forth.

Therefore, it is now more important than ever, that we work more closely and

collectively with the international community to address these security
concerns and threats.

9

This year we witnessed constructive engagement towards better managing
relations along the Korean peninsula. The UN must continue to ensure that
conflict prevention and resolution remains a central plank to its work as

mandated by the UN Charter.

Solomon Islands recognises that the stability in the Middle East is critical to
world peace. A peaceful Middle East will lead to a prosperous world.

Solomon Islands also continues to call for peaceful settlement and supports the

two state solution in the Israel and Palestinian conflict.

In the Pacific, security concerns are driven by external factors, human security

and clim te change challenges. In recognising the importance of our changing
security landscape, Pacific Islands Forum Leaders undertook to build on the
positive platform established by the Biketawa Declaration. This culminated in
our adoption earlier this month of the Boe Declaration, at the recent PIE Summit
in Nauru.

As we continue to work towards the goal of global peace, the need to actively
engage in peacekeeping remains.

Madam President, although small, Solomon Islands is contributing towards
achieving global peace and security, through participation in the UN s peace
keeping program. So far Solomon Islands has contributed 12 officers towards
the United Nations African mission in South Sudan.

10

Solomon Islands is committed to increasing our participation in UN Peace
Keeping Missions. Cognizant of the important role of UN Peacekeeping
missions, we call on the UN's collective support towards ensuring that the

sustainability of UN programmes is not being undermined by funding
shortfalls.

Having benefited from the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands,
Solomon Islands values the importance of peacekeeping missions.

Madam President, to sustain peace, adequate resources are required. The
international community also recognise this. In this connection, Solomon

Islands has benefited from the Peacebuilding Funds approved under the
Peacebuilding Commission in November 2017.

Through the resources provided under the Peacebuilding Fund e have been

able to facilitate dialogue involving a wide range of stakeholders on key issues
including land reform, rural development, border issues, and youth and
women s participation.

Recognizing the complex and ever-changing global security landscape and
realities, Solomon Islands reiterates the call for the reforms of the Security
Council to be inclusive by expanding its focus to non-traditional security
priorities. SIDS must have a voice, through a dedicated seat in the nonpermanent-seat category in the Council

11

NCD

Madam President the biggest threat facing the Pacific Islands apart from
Climate Change, is the threat caused by Non-Communicable Diseases.

Approximately 70% to 80% of all deaths in the Pacific can be attributed to
NCDs, with many of these deaths being premature.

In the Pacific, including Solomon Islands, the high prevalence of NCDs
translates to an economic burden on health care systems.

Two thirds of beds at National Referral Hospital in Honiara, our capital is
occupied by NCD patients. The burden that NCDs has on the productivity of the
people of the Solomon Islands, and opportunities foregone to provide care for
NCD patients, is an eminent socio-economic concern for an economy with a
small human resource base.

The nternational community already acknowledged the NCD challenge to SIDS
in the SAMOA Pathway. Now is the time for action.

Taiwan
Madam President, whilst, we speak of leaving no one behind, we still close our
doors to Taiwan and continue to contradict our own principles by leaving

Taiwan s 23 million people behind.

M dam President, the implementation of the SDGs requires a unified global
partnership. Taiwan is ready, willing and able to engage in and contribute to

the wide range of substantive UN programmes for the welfare of humanity.

12

Solomon Islands continues to call for the participation of Taiwan in the United
Nations specialised bodies including UNFCCC, World Health Organisation and
the International Civil Aviation Authority Organisation.

Taiwan is the 22nd largest economy in the world and as such Taiwan must be
part of the global solutions in the various international frameworks. Moreover,
it has a lot to contribute through its experience and technology capability.

If we are to focus on shared responsibility nd promote peaceful, equitable and
sustainable societies, we must give Taiwan and its 23 million people a chance.

Despite the contributions of Taiwan towards the well-being of citizens of the
globe, we continue to ignore the right of Taiwan to self-determination.

Madam President, the time has come for this august body to give due
recognition to Taiwan as a legitimate member of the Family of Nations.

Madam President, it is important th t administrating powers, the non-selfgoverning territories and all relevant organisations honour their commitments

made under the Charter of the 1960 Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. To that end and in ccordance

with the 1998 Noumea Accord, Solomon Islands/welcomes the referendum to
be held in New Caledonia on 4th November 2018 that is both free and fair.

Solomon Islands re ffirms that human ri hts principles are universal,
indivisible, interrelated and must be treated in a fair manner. All states have the

moral duty and responsibility to uphold, respect and promote human rights

13

and; where necessary take preventive protective and punitive measures

against human rights abuses and violations.

Solomon Islands recognises and respects Indonesia s sovereignty over its
territorial boundaries. My Government commits to work with the Government
of Indonesia on areas of mutual interest including human rights concerns in
Papua and West Papua.

Madam President, Solomon Islands is committed to the principles of good
governance and transparency. We have passed the Anti-Corruption Act which
aims to eliminate the scourge of corruption from all levels of our society. In
addition, Parliament has passed our Whistle-blowers Protection Act giving due

protection to those that that bring issues of corruption to the attention of the
relevant authorities.

Solomon Islands is also committed to the democratic principles and processes

and we are equally committed to the holding of free and fair elections in early
2019.

Madam President, Solomon Islands is an ardent believer in collective action. We

are staunch supporters of multilateralism. As such we stand in solidarity with
all members of this body - the pinnacle of multilateralism.

Without the UN, as a small island country, we will not be able to be heard. Other
louder voices will drown ours. Our expectations from this organization will

remain high. As such, adequate resources for programs and projects that will
impact citizens is needed. The UN has flaws. But Solomon Islands continues to

14

feel the impact of the power of working together on global issues that are
championed by the UN. We believe that the principles and values upon which
the UN is founded remain relevant.

Making United Nations relevant to all people is not just about standing up and
talking about it in this august body. It is incumbent upon us all to be seen as

making United Nations relevant to all peoples in the actions we take
individuall and collectively.

Madam President, 1 thank you.

15

