SATEMENT

H.E AHMED ISSE AWAD
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
FEDERAL REBULIC OF SOMALIA

ON THE OCCACION OF THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE
73RD SESSION OF THE UNITED NATION GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

NEW YORK
29 SEPTEMBER 2018

Madam President, Mr Secretary General, Excellencies,
Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen.

It is a profound honour for me to address the United
Nations General Assembly on behalf of the president of
the Federal Republic of Somalia.

Our administration has now completed one and a half
years; whereas I am glad to say that we have significantly

made huge strides in the security sector reform, and in
political and economic transformation, we are mindful of
the enormous challenges that we face in fixing Somalia,
and especially in overcoming the threats of terrorism.

I am equally mindful of the huge expectations that our

people have in our president's leadership, and in
providing lasting solutions to the challenges of security.

It is for that reason that our president, His Excellency
Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed had spent six weeks at the
defense headquarters, and spent time at various defense

positions; giving directions, and on-the-ground approvals,
at the Forward Operating Bases.

We have initiated a new round of operations that have
successfully opened up road networks, supply routes and

in turn liberated towns and villages from the occupation
of Al-shabab terrorists.

We recognize providing lasting solutions to the challenge
of security is an immense undertaking; it is one that
needs multi-faceted approach.

While we-together with our partners- militarily take out
and

dismantle all terrorists hideouts,

we are also

engaging our religious leaders, elders, the youth, women
and civil society groups to turn the tide against the
twisted ideology of hate and religious intolerance.

The silver lining is, young men and women are NOT
joining Alshabab out of a desirable appeal. That ideology
is no longer popular; Alshabab and Alqaeda DO NOT have
a ready stream of new and volunteer recruits in Somalia.
NOT ANYMORE.

It is also important to note that some within their ranksmostly the young men and women- have headed our
amnesty offer,

denounced

violence and

peacefully

surrendered.

Senior

commanders,

former

sector

heads

and

infantrymen have unconditionally surrendered as well,
bringing with them arsenal and non-standard tactical
vehicles known in military terms as "Technicals"

Thecombination of these factors has further weakened

the terror network's logistical and planning capabilities.

Alshabab how largely exists as an amorphous network

that operates as an irregular outfit, one that plans terror
attack from the shadows, but not as a stronger insurgent
force that can sustain resistance.

We are now engaged in the creation of civil networks to
encourage

a

healthy

partnership

enforcement and communities to flush

between
out

law

remnant

terrorists.

Our people acknowledge that sustaining security is a

collective responsibility; this awareness has in turn
helped us establish effective policing models that involve
the public.

Our quest for a peaceful and stable Somalia would not
stop at defeating Alshabab, but it is the FIRST STEP.

Our comprehensive security sector reform is the basis for
developing the capacity, streamlining, strategizing and
implementing

a

practical

transition

that

envisions

aneffective force, and steady security institutions.

We recognize that promoting justice, respecting the rule
of law and protecting peoples' rights is a key component
in peace building.

This quest includes an organized, gradual, and systematic
transfer of security tasks to forces agreed in our National
Security

Architecture,

while

at

the

same

time

establishing political and economic measures to support
and sustain the transition at the Federal, State and

community level.

On behalf of the people of Somalia, I unequivocally say,
we are truly grateful to the brave men and women who
served and continue serving in the African Union mission

for Somalia. They've made huge sacrifices to keep our
people safe, and that shall never be forgotten. We
remain indebted to them.

To consolidate our collective gains in security, and to
further support the Somali security institutions, to
enable us to take over from AMISOM,

I call on the UN to lift the arms embargo on Somalia.

This embargo has been long-standing; it is what is
leveling the field in our battle with the terrorist groups.
When our force has the same fighting arsenal as the

enemy, the odds are split. Stronger fighting capacity
would enable us to have the upper hand, it would

entirely dismantle the terrorists, and possibly within a
shorter time.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.

It is our administration's foremost objective that we

expand the democratic space of our people, it should be
sacrosanct that every Somali enjoys the inalienable rights
to life, freedoms and protections enshrined in our

provisional constitution-including freedom of the press,
freedom of association and even the freedom to petition

the government for redress from grievances.

And that is the reason why we are winning the fight
against terrorists. Our people have been suppressed and

subjugated for a long time by the terrorist networks.
These freedoms and protections mean a lot to them.

Individually and collectively our people and communities
recognize that it is the responsibility of their government
to protect their liberties, our people equally appreciate
that for the government to do that, we must all operate
within the realms of our constitution.

One of our core values is the protection, support and
giving platform to minority groups, communities, and
those with special needs.

Our

people acknowledge that

for

the system

of

governance to be effective, the rule of law must reign

supreme. Only then can we attain the vision of a
prosperous Somalia.

Our quest for inclusive and reformed politics is on the

right track. We have an agreed upon election model,
adopted jointly by the central government and the
federal member states in Baidoa in June of this year, and

endorsed by the international community in Brussels,
during the Somalia Partnership Forum in July.

We acknowledge that it is election period for some of the
Federal Member States,

our

role-

as the central

government- would be to promote transparent, free and
fair processes.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen

We have set specific goals in economic development; we
do have frameworks for key deliverables in attaining

goals towards sustainable productivity- in Agriculture,
fisheries and livestock.

Somalia enjoys the double blessings of a strategic
location on the Horn of Africa, and a vast wealth in
natural resources.

Significant oil reserves, natural gas, and iron ore, arable
and productive fields, as well as Africa's second longest

coastline

after the

island

of

Madagascar

provide

enormous opportunities for sustainable output.

This

government's

objective

isto

tap

into

these

opportunities, transform our economy, streamline our

trade and investment policies and open up new trade
routes, and horizons for our people

In that regard, we are seeking to strengthen alliances

with our core partners to promote trade and investment
opportunities even as we widen our scope in our quest

for broader, far-reaching economic cooperation.

We seek to strengthen strategic partnerships with our
neighbors, the continent and the world where we share
mutual interests in economic development, security and
promotion of social cooperation.

One of the key priorities of this government is to
promote sustainable fiscal policies to grow our economy
and instill the discipline required to maintain it.

Somalia is committed to working purposefully towards

financial self-sufficiency and, as a result, reaching the
crucial Sustainable development goals.

Through the IMF Staff Monitored Program we have raised
domestic revenue to unprecedented levels and we are in

the

process

of

normalizing

relations

with

the

International Financial Institutions through continuous

dialogue and meaningful engagement. These efforts are
edging us closer towards debt relief.

10

Somalia is committed to boost economic integration and

free trade flow across the region.

The horn of Africa is undergoing a remarkable political
and economic transformation. Somalia is proud to be
taking a huge role in the quest for the economic
integration of the Horn, and in taking mediator role in
ending decades-long conflicts that has dogged the region,
contributing towards realizing the African Union goal of
silencing the gun by 2020
A new dawn of leadership is at hand in the horn of
Africa, and a stronger desire to bolster historical ties for
common interests provides the means for effective
cooperation among the countries of the Horn.

To achieve our common goal of economic progress and
prosperity for the Horn of Africa, I humbly call on the
UNITED NATIONS to lift all economic sanctions on our

neighbor, ERITREA.
11

This move would ease flow of imports and exports,

movement of people and businesses, and it would fulfill
our vision for the successful economic integration of the
region.

There is evidence everywhere that Africa is on the move
towards greater connectivity and prosperity.

East Africa is becoming the continent's fastest growing

region, as Africa becomes the world's largest free trade
area.

It is time for us to turn our focus on, and encourage
intra-African investment.

Somalia- with it's potential in resources, is committed to
move with the continent. We've recently joined the

COMESA trade bloc, and we've also applied admittance
to a number of other trade and economic blocs.

12

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen

It is only by expanding the prospects for open markets,
free trade, investments and policies that ease movement
of people and businesses between the countries of Africa

that we can bring solutions for domestic, economic and
social challenges that we face, and work towards
realizing Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

We need to formulate joint policies that provide lasting

solutions for illegal immigration. Policies that expand our
scopes and vision in economic and social progress that in

result bring about job creation and opportunities for our
youth, provide meaningful employment and improve
quality of education.

It should no longer be business as usual when year in,
year out we are losing hundreds of young productive men

and women to the Mediterranean, ostensibly in search
for better living prospects.

13

It is even ironic that this happens as the world focuses on
Africa for its resources, markets, and labour.

Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen

I am hopeful that better days, and better prospects are
ahead for all us.

For Somalia, it is the beginning of a transformation; we
have risen anew and fresh. We are not only optimistic,
but we are also motivated.

Our security is improving, our economy is on an upward

scale, our foreign policy has already received accolades
in the region and beyond.

We are focused on keeping pace with the ever-changing

dynamics in economy and technology and embracing new
ideas, and as such we are open to all investments.

We are ready for business.

THANK YOU!!
14

