  

  
  
  
  
  
STATEMENT  
By  
H.E.  GEN.  TABAN  DENG  GAI  
THE  FIRST  VICE  PRESIDENT  
REPUBLIC  OF  SOUTH  SUDAN  
AT  THE  73rd  SESSION  OF  THE  UNITED  NATIONS  GENERAL  ASSEMBLY  
  
28th  SEPTEMBER  2018  
  
New  York,  USA  
  
Check  Against  Delivery  
  
  

Your  Excellency  Maria  Fernanda  Espinosa  Graces,  President  of  the  73rd  Session  
of  the  United  Nations  General  Assembly,  
Your  Excellency  Antonio  Guterres,  Secretary  General  of  the  United  Nations,  
Your  Excellencies  Heads  of  State  and  Government,  
Honourable  Ministers,  
Distinguished  Delegates,  
  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  
Good  Morning  
Madam  President,  
  It   is   my   utmost   honor   to   deliver   this   statement   on   behalf   of   H.E.   Gen.   Salva   Kiir  
Mayardit,  President  of  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  who  unfortunately  could  not  be  
present   here   today   due   to   his   engagement   in   consolidating   and   streamlining   the  
implementation  of  the  peace  process.    
  
  
Madam  President,    
I  would  also  like  to  congratulate  you,  Madam  President,  on  your  election  as  President  
of  this  73rd  Session  of  the  General  Assembly  and  being  the  4th  woman  to  hold  
this  position.  The  Republic  of  South  Sudan  affirms  it  commitment  to  play  its  role  in  
supporting  the  implementation  of  the  agenda  you  set  for  this  historic  session.  
On  behalf  of  the  people  of  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan,  and  my  Government  I  would  
like   to   reiterate   our   heartfelt   condolences   to   the   family   of   the   former   UN   Secretary  
General  H.E.  Koffi  Annan  who  passed  away  recently  and    to  the  entire  UN  Family.  He  
played   a   crucial   role   in   supporting   the   people   of   the   Republic   of   South   Sudan   by  
ensuring  that  there  was  peace  and  was  instrumental  in  formation  of  the  Republic  of  
South  Sudan.  

	  

2	  

Also,  I  was  happy  to  witness  the  centenary  of  Late  Madiba.  It  was  indeed  befitting  that  
the  UN  dedicated  24th  September  for  the  Nelson  Mandela  Summit.  He  was  an  icon  of  
peace,  whose  legacy  will  live  forever.    
  
  
Madam  President,  
  
The   theme   that   you   have   selected   for   this   session   “Making   the   United   Nations  
relevant   to   all   people:   Global   leadership   and   shared   responsibilities   for  
peaceful,  equitable  and  sustainable  societies”,  resonates  very  well  with  the  vision  
of  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  for  peace  and  prosperity.  
  
Madam  President,  
Your  Excellencies,    
Distinguished  Delegates,    
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  
Allow  me  at  this  juncture  to  share  with  this  August  House  some  of  the  successes  we  
have  made  in  our  long  walk  to  peace  and  prosperity:  Last  year,  I  stood  before  you  as  
the  First  Vice  President  of  a  country  amidst  violent  conflict.  Today,  I  stand  before  you  
as  a  testament  of  what  members  of  this  body  have  helped  achieve  in  the  Republic  of  
South   Sudan,   especially   the   dedicated   UN   Agencies   operating   in   our   country,   the  
IGAD,   AU,   EU,   TROIKA,   China,   IGAD   Partners   Forum   (IPF),   international   partners  
and  friends  of  South  Sudan.  
I  am  pleased  to  inform  this  August  House,  of  a  more  united  Republic  of  South  Sudan,  
that   is   heading   towards   peaceful   stability.   With   the   continued   support   and   goodwill  
from  our  regional  and  international  partners,  we  are  on  schedule  to  hold  free  and  fair  
general  elections  after  a  transitional  period  of  36  months.    

	  

3	  

The  path  towards  this  agreement  begun  at  the  31st  Extra-­Ordinary  Summit  of  IGAD  
Assembly  of  Heads  of  States  and  Government  on  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  of  12th  
June   2017   in   Addis   Ababa,   Ethiopia.   They   aligned   on   the   need   for   a   High-­Level  
Revitalization  Forum  (HLRF)  of  all  the  parties  to  the  Agreement  on  the  Resolution  of  
Conflict   in   the   Republic   of   South   Sudan   (ARCSS).   This   process   included   new  
stakeholders  and  the  inclusion  of  various  groups  including  civil  society,  women  
groups,  religious  leaders,  youth  and  eminent  personalities  as  observers.  
The   purpose   of   the   HLRF,   as   stated   by   the   Extra-­Ordinary   IGAD   Heads   of   State  
Summit  held  in  Addis  Ababa,  Ethiopia,  was  threefold.  Firstly,  to  institute  a  Permanent  
Ceasefire,  second  to  give  fresh  impetus  to  the  inclusive  implementation  of  the  
provisions   of   the   ARCSS   and   thirdly,   to   agree   on   new   realistic   timelines   and  
implementation   schedules   towards   democratic   elections   at   the   end   of   the  
Transitional  Period.    
  
The  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  unreservedly  embraced  the  IGAD-­
led  High  Level  Revitalization  Forum  (HLRF)  for  the  Agreement  on  the  Resolution  of  
the  Conflict  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  (ARCSS).  Its  objectives  were  crystal  
clear  and  to  that  extent,  the  Delegation  of   the   Government   of  the  Republic  of  
South   Sudan   attended   the   HLRF   meetings   fully   prepared   to   utilize   the  
opportunities   to   bring   about   the   achievement   of   comprehensive   and   lasting  
peace.    
  
The  32nd  Extra-­Ordinary  Summit  of  IGAD  on  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  entrusted  
H.E.   Field   Marshal   Omar   Hassan   Ahmed   El-­Bashir,   President   of   the   Republic   of  
Sudan  to  facilitate  a  second  (2nd)  round  of  face-­to-­face  discussions  between  H.E.  Gen.  
Salva   Kiir   Mayardit   and   Dr.   Riek   Machar   Teny   and   other   political   leaders   to  
resolve  the  outstanding  issues  on  governance  and  security  arrangements  of  the  IGAD-­
led  High-­Level  Revitalization  Forum  (HLRF).  
  
Madam  President,  

	  

4	  

The  Signing  of  the  Khartoum  Declaration  of  Agreement  between  the  Parties  to  the  
Conflict  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  took  place  on  the  27th  June  2018.  H.E.  Gen.  
Salva   Kiir   Mayardit   and   Dr.   Riek   Machar   together   with   other   political   leaders  
approved   under   that   agreement:   i)   Declaration   of   Permanent   Ceasefire   throughout  
South  Sudan  based  on  the  Cessation  of  Hostilities  Agreement  (COHA)  signed  on  21st  
December  2017.  ii)  Adoption  of  Security  Arrangements  in  order  to  build  one  national  
army,  police  and  other  security  organs  of  an  inclusive  character  and  iii)  Conclusion  of  
the   Agreement   on   the   Revised   Bridging   Proposal   before   the   closure   of   Khartoum  
Round  of  talks.  
On  12th  September  2018,  all  the  parties  (Transitional  Government  of  National  Unity  
(TGoNU),   Sudan’s   People   Liberation   Movement/Army-­   In   Opposition   (SPLM/A-­IO),  
South  Sudan  Opposition  Alliance  (SSOA),   Former  Detainees  (FD’s),   Other  Political  
Parties   (OPP)   and   other   stakeholders   to   the   ARCSS   signed   the   final   Revitalized  
Agreement   on   the   Resolution   of   the   Conflict   in   the   Republic   of   South   Sudan   (R-­  
ARCSS,  2018)  in  Addis  Ababa,  Ethiopia.  This  was  graciously  attended  and  witnessed  
by  the  IGAD  Heads  of  State  and  Government,  the  international  community  (AU,  EU,  
UN,  TROIKA,  China,  IPF,  international  partners  and  friends  of  the  Republic  of  South  
Sudan).  
  
In  addition  to  the  recently  signed  Revitalized  Peace  Agreement  on  the  Resolution  of  
Conflict  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  on  12th  September  2018  (R-­ARCSS)  in  Addis  
Ababa,   Ethiopia.   We   have   also   embarked   on   the   National   Dialogue   and   the  
‘Grassroots  People  to  People’s  Peace  Initiatives  since  December  2015.  It  is  our  belief  
that  this  complementary  three-­track  approach  is  the  only  way  to  consolidate  the  efforts  
for  peace  on  the  ground.  Moreover,  this  ensures  the  return  to  accountability  and  the  
upholding   of   human   rights   in   my   country.   In   a   unique   environment   such   as   the  
Republic  of  South  Sudan,  a  multilayered  approach  like  the  one  adopted  by  my  
Government  is  the  best  way  forward.  
Madam  President,  
Your  Excellencies,    
Distinguished  Delegates,    
	  

5	  

Ladies  and  Gentlemen,    
  
It  is,  therefore,  against  this  background  that  the  Transitional  Government  of  National  
Unity   (TGONU)   has   embraced   the   full   implementation   of   the   Agreement   on   the  
Resolution   of   Conflict   in   the   Republic   of   South   Sudan   (ARCSS,   2015)   as   the   only  
instrument  pivotal  to  achieving  this  mission  and  vision.    
The  Government  of  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  is  ready  to  welcome  forces  from  the  
guarantors  of  the  Revitalized  Agreement  on  the  Resolution  of  Conflict  in  the  Republic  
of  South  Sudan  (R-­ARCSS)  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  Peace  Agreement  
and  encourages  the  IGAD  &  AU  to  dialogue  with  the  United  Nations  Security  Council  
(UNSC)   on   how   the   Regional   Protection   Force   (RPF)   can   help   in   monitoring   and  
ensuring  that  peace  holds  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan.    
With   regards   to   security   sector   reforms,   which   are   a   major   pillar   of   the  
Revitalized   Agreement   on   Resolution   of   the   Conflict   in   the   Republic   of   South  
Sudan  (R-­  ARCSS,  2018),  my  Government  reiterates  its  commitment  and  resolve  
to  implement  transitional  security  arrangements.  Indeed,  they  encompass  a  range  
of   security   sector   reforms,   including   the   cantonment   of   forces.   Moreover,   the  
Government   is   committed   to   transforming   the   Sudan   Peoples’   Liberation   Army  
(SPLA),   and   structures   are   already   in   place   to   achieve   the   aim   of   creating   a  
professional  national  army.    
I  am  very  pleased  to  inform  this  August  House  of  the  formation  of  the  National  Pre-­
Transitional  Committee  (NPTC),  which  is  comprised  of  all  the  stakeholders,  that  shall  
be  entrusted  with  the  functions  of  oversight  and  coordination  of  the  implementation  of  
the  Peace  Agreement  activities  of  the  Pre-­Transitional  Period.    
  
Madam  President,  
Your  Excellencies,    
Distinguished  Delegates,    
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,    
	  

6	  

  
Connoted  with  the  aim  of  achieving  lasting  peace  is  the  establishment  of  mechanisms  
to   tackle   impunity   and   accountability.   In   the   recently   decided   Terrain   case,   the  
Government   interviewed   the   victims   in   order   to   hold   the   individuals   responsible   to  
account.   A   detailed   investigation   formula   and   evidence   gathering   process   with   the  
support  of  the  US  Government  through  the  FBI  meant  that  the  victims  were  able  to  
identify  their  attackers  and  enable  the  law  to  prosecute  those  accountable  to  the  full  
extent.  Since  the  eruption  of  the  conflict  in  December  2013,  the  Military  Court  
Martial   has   tried   204   cases,   including   the   Terrain   case.   The   Terrain   trials  
demonstrated  the  commitment  of  the  SPLA  to  make  its  members  account  for  
their  crimes,  including  abuse  of  civilians.  
It  goes  without  saying  that  war  has  blighted  the  economy  of  the  Republic  South  Sudan.  
We  have  seen  tremendous  loss  in  life,  property  and  human  dignity.    
No  report  can  cut  to  my  heart  as  the  sight  of  our  young  and  the  infirm  dying  needlessly  
and   suffering   deprivation.   Indeed,   I   have   been   asked   specifically   why   my  
Government  believes  that  it  is  a  permanent  peace  this  time?    There  is  an  African  
proverb  that  advises  “to  look  where  you  have  slipped,  because  it  is  there  you  
will   find   what   made   you   fall”.   It   is   through   a   change   of   leaders’   attitude   from  
entrenched   positions   that   we   have   moved   towards   a   reconciliatory   and  
accommodating   Government   of   national   unity.   My   President,   H.E.   Gen.   Salva  
Kiir   Mayardit   has   compromised   on   many   positions   and   worked   with   more  
stakeholders   for   the   sake   of   peace.   The   IGAD   led   peace   initiatives   have  
demonstrated  the  way  in  which  African  solutions  to  African  problems,  can  lead  
to  an  agreement.    
Madam  President,  
Your  Excellencies,    
Distinguished  Delegates,    
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,    
  

	  

7	  

I  extend  my  heartfelt  appreciation  to  IGAD,  in  particular  the  Republic  of  Sudan  
and   the   broader   International   community,   without   their   critical   role,   this  
Revitalized  Peace  Agreement  would  not  have  happened.    
In  this  regard,  given  the  positive  role  being  played  by  the  Republic  of  Sudan  in  
the  peace  process  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  and  the  region,  we  appeal  for  
the  speedy  normalization  of  the  relationship  between  the  Republic  of  Sudan  and  
United   States   of   America.   Moreover,   we   call   for   the   total   lifting   of   sanctions  
against  the  Republic  of  Sudan.  
We  urge  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Sudan  for  a  speedy  resolution  of  
the   contentious   issues   in      Blue   Nile,   Southern   Kordofan   and   Darfur.   This  
emanates  from  our  strong  belief  that  stability  in  these  areas  is  critical  for  total  
and  lasting  peace  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  and  the  Republic  of  Sudan  
and  the  region  as  a  whole.  
  
On  Abyei,  as  we  await  the  settlement  of  its  final  status,  the  Government  of  the  
Republic  of  South  Sudan  reiterates  its  support  to  the  recommendations  of  the  
UN  Secretary  General  to  the  UN  Security  Council  on  August,  20th  this  year.  We  
also   commend   the   good   work   of   UNISFA   and   remain   grateful   to   the   Federal  
Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia,  the  sole  UNISFA  troops  contributor.  We  also,  
urge  this  August  House  to  support  efforts  still  at  the  level  of  the  African  Union  
to   find   a   political   solution   to   the   Abyei   matter,   in   particular   we   call   for   the  
implementation  of  the  AU  High  Implementation  Panel’s  (HIP)/  Mbeki  proposal  of  
21st  September   2012,  which  has  been  accepted  for  more  than  six  times  to  date  
by  the  AU  Peace  and  Security  Council.  It  is  high  time  that  we  bring  an  end  to  the  
suffering  of  the  Ngok  Dinka  people.  
  
  
Madam  President,  
Your  Excellencies,    

	  

8	  

Distinguished  Delegates,    
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,    
Conflict  by  itself  can  be  a  vehicle  for  positive  change,  if  we  are  aware  of  where  
we  came  from,  where  we  are  now  and  where  we  are  heading  to.  As  brothers  and  
sisters,  we  have  hurt  each  other.  As  we  seek  national  healing,  my  President  H.E.  
Gen.   Salva   Kiir   Mayardit,   empowered   a   cross-­section   of   community  
representatives   and   mediators   to   set   up   a   National   Dialogue   and   other  
Grassroots  ‘People  to  People’  Peace  Initiatives.    
The  National  Dialogue  was  launched  to  conduct  a  multilayered  approach  to  repairing  
the   social   fabric.   It   has   been   heavily   criticized   by   some   external   observers,   mainly  
because   of   the   misconception   that   it   was   considered   as   a   substitute   to   the   Peace  
Talks.   At   the   launch   of   the   National   Dialogue   in   2015,   its   aim   was   to   create   a  
forum  in  which  the  causes  of  conflict  could  be  discussed,  and  among  others  
things   to   ask   the   populace   important   questions   such   as   those   of   national  
identity,  governance  and  the  relationship  between  the  communities,  including  
causes  of  inter  communal  conflict.    
The  Grassroots  component  has  been  the  most  effective,  members  of  the  committee  
visited  regions  starting  from  the  community  level  asking  questions  designed  to  identify  
the  causes  of  division  whilst  also  searching  for  solutions  to  those  divisions  and  how  to  
heal  them.  The  process  allowed  for  those  who  didn’t  have  an  opportunity  to  have  
their  voices  heard,  to  begin  putting  across  their  various  viewpoints.  The  reports  
from   the   Grassroots   were   candid   in   their   nature,   as   the   communities   were  
allowed  to  express  their  opinions  freely  without  fear  of  repercussions.  We  look  
forward  to  seeing  the  next  steps  of  this  process  as  we  enter  the  Transitional  Period.    
Madam  President,  
Your  Excellencies,    
Distinguished  Delegates,    
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,    

	  

9	  

In   “Making   the   United   Nations   relevant   to   all   people:   Global   leadership   and  
shared   responsibilities   for   peaceful,   equitable   and   sustainable   societies”,   I  
would  like  to  reiterate  that  my  Government  welcomes  the  presence  and  support  of  the  
United   Nations   Agencies.   However,   the   terms   of   this   relationship   need   to   be  
reconsidered,   specifically   in   protecting   the   vulnerable   citizens   in   the   host  
country.      It   is   only   through   a   reflective   approach   that   we   can   move   forward  
towards  adapting  the  nature  of  this  institution  to  make  it  fit  for  the  environment  
today.    
  
Last  but  not  least,  as  I  speak  of  reviving  peace  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan,  it  is  
only   right   to   mention   John   F.   Kennedy   who   said   “Peace   is   a   daily,   a   weekly,   a  
monthly   process,   gradually   changing   opinions,   slowly   eroding   old   barriers,  
quietly  building  new  structures”.  I  call  upon  members  of  the  UN  family,  including  
those  who  are  skeptical,  to  give  peace  a  chance  in  the  Republic  of  South  Sudan  
by  supporting  the  critical  implementation  phase  of  the  Peace  Agreement.  The  
Republic   of   South   Sudan   will   continue   its   cooperation   with   the   United   Nations,   the  
regional  bodies,  IGAD,  EAC,  AU,  EU,  TROIKA,  China,  other  International  partners  and  
all  our  friends  as  we  work  to  enhance  conditions  in  our  country.    We  undertake  to  
consolidate   Peace,   Justice,   rebuild   strong   Institutions   in   our   country,   and  
stabilize  our  economy.    
  
  
We  call  upon  you  all  as  partners  to  support,  cooperate,  consult  and  dialogue  as  we  
together  partner  in  achieving  your  agenda  for  “Making  the  United  Nations  relevant  
to   all   people:   Global   leadership   and   shared   responsibilities   for   peaceful,  
equitable  and  sustainable  societies”.    This  is  our  agenda  too.  
  
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  
  

	  

10	  

  

	  

11	  

