YPB

Statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Suriname,

H.E. Yldiz Pollack - Bei hle, at the General Debate of the 73rd session
of the United Nations General Assembly, New York, 29 September 2018

Excellency Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces, President of the General
Assembly
Colleagues, Excellencies

Introduction
It is an honour to deliver this statement on behalf of my President, His
E cellency Desire Delano Bouterse.
Madame President,

I sincerely applaud your election as the first woman of the Latin American
and Caribbean region, to preside over the 73rd Session of the General
Assembly.

In the course of this session year, the membership stands to gain greatly
from your outstanding personal qualities and wealth of experience as a
professional diplomat, at the helm of our General Assembly.
Suriname pledges its unwavering support for your efforts in making our
organization relevant again for the entire world community, in particular
the disadvantaged and marginalized, including women and youth.
Madame President,
As we remember the legacy of former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, we

honor his tireless efforts towards making the world more peaceful and
humane by fighting against inequality and injustice, combating
diseases and conflict with all the means at our disposal, and putting the
United Nations at the center of multilateralism.

1

YPB

As honored as I am to address this gathering, that brings together so many
world leaders, I am also disheartened by the somber tone expressed by
Secretary Ge eral Guterres, at the presentation of his annual report on the
work of our organization.
As the Secretary General noted, targets set last year have not been met.

And we have to ask ourselves

will we make the same appeals this year,

with tire same attitude of business as usual with regard to outcomes,
whether effective or not?
Suriname concurs with the assessment of the Secretary General that the
fundamental issue confronting the international communit today is the
lack of trust among nations.

In this regard, as a small nation, my country firmly commits to upholding
internationally accepted principles, which clearly define who we are, and
which provide for predictable actions in our inte national relations,
thereby creating a climate of trust, understanding and respect.
We underscore the need for a rules-based world order with the United
Nations at the center, which is needed to create the necessary platform to
address global concerns, among which the mobilization of funds to
mitigate the effects of climate change.
Being a low lying coastal state, Suriname is among the most threatened
countries directly impacted by sea level rise. It is approximately 80% of our
population that resides in the coastal area, while our main productive
activities are also concentrated in this area, resulting in an existential
threat.

As we have witnessed in the past days, the forces of nature stroke once
again, not only at our sister Caribbean nations, but also elsewhere in the
world, we are being urged to move beyond the rhetoric and take
immediate action.
Mutual understanding, tolerance and solidarity
Madame President,
My country is strate ically located on the Guyana Shield, has an abundance
of natural resources, a unique biodiversity and an impressive forest cover of
over 90%.

2

YPB

Moreover, our pop lation, including indigenous peoples, tribal communities
of African descent, and various other ethnic groups, descends from all

continents of the world. All expressing and enjoying exceptional tolerance
and religious freedom, respect each other s cultural background, and all of
whom are equally entitled and have access to social progr ms including
healthcare and education.

We ha e used this diversity inherited from our colonial past, to our
advantage by rejecting the divide and rule of yesteryear.
We are indeed proud that our people, coming from different ethnic and
religious backgrounds, can live in peace and harmony with each other,
forging bonds conducive to nation building and working towards the
wellbeing of all citizens young and old.
Economic challenges and policy measures
Madame President,

As it relates to our economic challenges and policy measures, my country

as a commodity-based export economy, is highly vulnerable to commodity
price shocks. The sharp downturn in gold and oil prices 3 years ago and the
closure of the century-old bauxite operations in 2016 ha e led to a sharp
recession and a severe loss in government revenues.

The economy contracted by a combined 8% during 2015-16, while the
government lost more than a third of its fiscal revenue in terms of GDP during
2012-1 7. This required unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy
adjustments.

To stabilize the exchange rate, reduce domestic demand, and reestablish a
viable balance of payments position, the monetar authorities moved to a
flexible exchange rate regime and sharply curtailed credit creation in the
country, with credit to the private sector falling from 37% of GDP in 2016 to

28% in 2017.
Since October 2016, the exchange rate has stabilized, monthly inflation rates
have fallen to less than one percent, and the current account deficit in the
balance of payments has vanished.
The fiscal response, usually a much more difficult undertaking, began in
earnest in August 2015 with a massive contraction in government expenditure
and increases in taxation.

While the crisis continued to erode revenue in terms of GDP, expenditure was

cut from more than 30% of GDP in 2015 to less than 23% in 2017.
3

YPB

As a result, the unsustainable 10% of GDP deficit that emerged during the
crisis years has already been cut to an estimated 5% of GDP in 2018.
Looking ahead, the government also put in place significant reforms to limit
the impact of future export commodity shocks. Institutional reforms will help
promote foreign direct investment aimed at diversifying the economy away
from its heavy reliance on extractive industries; fiscal reforms aim at reducing
reliance on direct tax income and broadening the tax base; and the
establishment of a sovereign wealth fund will stabilize income derived from
extractive industries and help mitigate the fiscal impact of future shocks.
Our efforts have borne fruit, and the government is committed to continuing
the fiscal efforts to restore the primary fiscal surplus that was typical in
Suriname. The International Monetary Fund and inte ational rating agencies
have commended the efforts and foresee a continued improvement in the
macroeconomic performance of Suriname.

Black-listing, de-riskin and the Graduation to Middle Income Country
These efforts to steer us on the right path of development are worsened
by obstacles that are unjustifiable, and not of our making. First of all,
Madame President, I wish to refer to the matter of the classification of
Suriname as a middle income country, which I alluded to at this very
rostrum last year, but which remains unresolved.

Our classification, like many other developing countries, including the
Caribbean, based on GDP per capita, does not reflect our vulnerabilities. We
strongly reject this unrealistic classification which disregards the full set of
challenges that we face.

This is a matter, Madame President, which should be addressed with
urgency. Access to concessional financing for our development is critical, to

allow for the implementation of programs to benefit all our citizens.
Correspondent banking and de-risking, further aggravated by unilateral
actions, among which blacklisting and the arbitrary seizure of funds,
without due regard to the severe consequences to the community, including
businesses and families, remain obstacles that we do not have ny
influence on.

An atmosphere of trust and political ill is crucial and should lead to
dialo ue and cooperation in order to address all matters of concern.
Mitigating the effects of climate change
4

YPB

Madame President,

Although Suriname contributes significantly to the mitigation of the
effects of climate change through its high forest cover and low deforestation
rate, it is regrettable to acknowledge that global commitments, based on the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, have yet to be
materialized into tangible results.
Su iname is one of the 11 countries with a high forest cover and low
deforestation rate, representing 20 percent of the Earth s remaining tropical
forests, and storing 18 percent of tropical forest carbon. Yet, we are not fully

benefitting from lobal arrangements associated with sound forest
management.

At COP23 (UNFCCC Climate Change Conference), last year, Suriname
pledged to cap its forests at 93%. We also made the conditional commitment
to maintain our leadership position as one of the most carbon negative
countries. This pledge, subject to scientific, technological, technical and
financial support, goes beyond national benefits into the realm of global
gains for humanity.

It is against this reality, that Suriname will host a High Level Conference on
Climate Finance Mobilization in Februar of next year. This conference will
seek to initiate and implement new economic models of eco-sustainability to
improve the quality of life for all.
Combating the illicit drug trade
Madam President,
The scourges of illicit drug trafficking, transnational organized crime,
terrorism as well as trafficking in arms and persons, place an

unprecedented burden on the financial and human resource capacity of
small developing countries, hampering their ability to implement policy
measures ai ed at achieving development objectives.

Drug abuse and drug trafficking destroy families, disrupt communities and
rob our youth from a productive future.

5

YPB

And our open borders compel us to strengthen the coo eration with
adjacent, neighboring and other countries to effectively combat
transnational organized crime and the negative consequences associated

with it. Such cooperation must yield results and we join others in the fight
against the world drug problem.
We need more than lip service. We need joint action!
Likewise, we solicit international cooperation to protect our unique
biodiversity which is under threat, through illegal poaching and trade in
endangered species.

Bilateral, re ional and international/multilateral cooperation
Madame President,

As it relates to our collabo ation at the bilateral, sub- regional and
ultilateral levels, Suriname continues to stand for international peace and
security.

We advocate for dialogue in any e isting conflict and uphold
internationally accepted principles of non-interference, non- intervention,

and respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Suriname respects and protects all human rights, however, we strongly
reject usin human rights for political gains.
All conflicts that arise, are a consequence of departing from these valued
principles.

That is why I wish to reiterate, Madam President, that these valued
principles form the bedrock of Suriname s foreign policy.
In the same vein, my country applauds those who have chosen the path
of dialogue to resolve their disputes. In this regard, allow me to refer to the
rapprochement between countries in the Horn of Africa, and on the Korean
Peninsula.

6

YPB

Diversification of bilateral and regional partners
Madame President,
Our geographic location, positions us as a strategic hub. As such,

Suriname has strengthened its bonds with neighboring and adjacent
countries and with those we enjoy re arkable historic ties with.
As we strengthen partnerships based on mutual respect and benefit, we
seek to advance our national development objectives with a focus on
agriculture and tourism, through Foreign Direct Investments, South-South
cooperation and regional partnerships.

Suriname, with its human capital as its greatest asset, an abundance of
natural resources such as fresh water, oil, gold, bauxite and other minerals,
maintains warm and friendly relations with many countries.
We focus on reinforcing existing partnerships and initiating new ones. As a
result, many friends from all corners of the world are seeking to forge

durable partnerships on the basis of mutual respect and benefit.
Madame President,
The Latin American and Caribbean region has not been spared from
tensions due to existing differences of opinion on various issues. The
proclamation of the region as a zone of peace in 2014 has certainly
contributed to ensuring that there is no room for military adventures.
We stron ly appeal for dialo ue where there are differences.
We must prevent outside forces to i pose their own agenda upon us,
contrary to our interests as a region.

Let us focus on what binds us, and not what divides us!
Economic warfare

It is reprehensible that some economically powerful countries resort to
applying unilateral sanctions when they encounter ideological, political or
trade differences. This economic warfare does not bode well in solving
disputes. On the contrary, positions are hardened with far reaching
consequences for regional and international stability, peace and security.

7

YPB

Suriname strongly rejects these coercive economic and trade measures
since they are counter-productive and create an atmosphere of distrust,

making a peaceful resolution of disputes almost out of reach.
In this regard, we disapprove of the continuation of the economic,
financial and commercial embargo against Cuba and its people. Time and
again, the majority of nations takes a stand against this embargo. Is it now,
Madame President, not the time to honor the demand of the majority of the
international communit and put an end to the blockade?
Madame President,
The current ar s race is deplorable and it absorbs tremendous resources.

Imagine what we could have achieved in making the world more humane if
these resources where simply channeled to combating disease and hunger,

improving food safety and securit . Who would not aspire to these
sustainable goals, eradicating poverty and hunger?
Like many other countries, we call for an end to the arms race, while also

rejecting the militarization of outer space and the research of artificial
intelligence for warfare purposes.

Multilateralism
Madame President,
Multilateralism remains essential for undertaking joint actions in
achieving sustainable development and in addressing matters of global
concerns such as maintaining peace and security, combating terrorism and
transnational organized crime and addressing climate change.

Suriname supports these initiatives as we seek to reinforce the validity of
multilateralism based on the principles and purposes of the United Nations.

The way forward
Madame President,
We are convinced that the United Nations remains the most important
organization to discuss all matters confronting the international
communit , aimed at finding solutions and taking into consideration the
interests of its me ber states. It is therefore essential to make this

8

YPB

institution more relevant than it is today, by making it more democratic,
transparent and accountable.

Continued efforts to reform the United Nations remain crucial to reflect
the realities of today s world. For example, the process to reform the Security
Council must be comprehensive, inclusive, balanced and consensus-based,

taking into account the interests of both developed and developing
countries and further promoting, preserving and strengthening
international peace and security.

Madame President,

Your priorities for the 73rd session have been noted and Suriname is fully
supportive as together we try to make this or anization relevant again.

We have to ensure tha our youth is engaged and participates in a
structured manner in the affairs of this world organization, recognizing that
they are a demographic dividend for development and have a unique and
innovative perception on matters.

As lead Head in the Caribbean Community for youth development,
Suriname wholeheartedly supports the sentiments expressed earlier in the
debate, to create a United Nations agency dealing with youth. I expect that
the recently launched UN Youth Strategy will be inclusive and deliver on the
aspirations of the world’s young people.

Madam President,
In the final analysis, when Suriname speaks, e speak to give strength to
the voices of all countries, whether small or big, developed or developing.
We ust globally recommit to the principle of dialogue and the cause
of lasting peace.
This recommitment that I call us all to embrace, is the inherent right to
decent life and protection for all who are born on this planet.
Through our organization, we have at our disposal all the means to take
on this responsibility.

9

YPB

We have no one but ourselves do this for us. Let me concl de, Madam

President, by saying that if there were no United Nations, today, we would
be calling for its creation.
Therefore, as I said before, let us focus on what binds us, rather than
hat divides us.
God Bless you, thank you!!

10

