PERMANENT MISSION OF TAJIKISTAN TO THE UNITED NATIONS
216 East 49* Str., New York, N.Y. 10017; tel: (212) 207-3315;
fax: (212) 207-3855; e-mail: tajIMstanun@mfa.tj

STATEMENT
by
H.E. Mr. Mahmadamin MAHMADAMINOV
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Tajikistan to the UN, Head of
the Delegation of the Republic of Tajikistan
at the General Debates of the 73rd UNGA session

Check against delivery

Making the United Nations Relevant to All People: Global Leadership and Shared
Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies

Distinguished Madam President,
At the outset, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, I would like to extend to
the President of the 73rdsession of the United Nations General Assembly, Maria Fernanda
Espinosa Garces, our sincere congratulations on her well-deserved election.
We are confident that her wisdom, diplomatic experience and skills will contribute to the success
of the current session of the United Nations General Assembly. She can rest assured of my
Delegation's constant support and cooperation in this regard.
I would also like to take this opportunity to commend H.E. Mr.Miroslav Lajcak, the President of
the 72nd session of the United Nations General Assembly for his able leadership during the
previous UNGA session.
Distinguished Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We live in an ever-changing world.
The unprecedented level of instability and uncertainty is on the rise in many parts of the world.
Global challenges such as climate change, terrorism and extremism, large-scale conflicts,
inequality, poverty, food and water security, lack of education and economic opportunities,
unemployment, to name a few, further affect the status quo.
Today s global challenges exert pressure on the very foundations of the world order and principles
of international relations. They undermine the efforts of the international community at achieving
the 2030 Agenda and its sustainable development goals.
Under these circumstances, making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global

Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies
becomes very pertinent.
And using the words of our former UN Secretary-General, the great diplomat and outstanding
human being, late Kofi Annan, who said We have a tendency to go through life as a individuals
and organizations, often focusing and stressing. This is what we do. But that is the wrong
question. We should be asking what should we be doing in this changing world. The world is
changing and the UN has to change and adapt with it. We can not be static .
As a universal institution, the UN should continue carrying out its noble mission of coordinating
the efforts of its member states to enhance the resilience of the countries to respond to the
modern threats and challenges.

2

At the same time, Member States shall also play an active part in this process by meeting their
commitments undertaken in 2030 Agenda, Addis Ababa Action Agenda and Paris Agreement,
to restore stability and thereby to ensure development.
Full implementation of the above milestone documents is required to address many of the socio¬
economic problems, the main drivers of extremism and terrorism.
Madam President,
My country believes that the response to the ever-increasing threat of terrorism and violent
extremism should be comprehensive, with the UN as a key coordinator.
The efforts should be focused on the elimination of the military infrastructure of international
terrorism, on depriving it of political, military and financial support; on prevention of the use of
the ICTs for radicalization of minds, recruitment and propaganda of extremism and violence.
To discuss the issues, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, in close cooperation with
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union and some partner countries, convened in Dushanbe on 3-4 May 2018 the High-Level
International Conference Countering Terrorism and Preventing Violent Extremism ,
We are confident that the Dushanbe Conference served as an excellent platform for
constructive and fruitful cooperation, inter alia, contributed to the achievement of a general
recognition of the negative impact and consequences of the current challenges; exploring
possibilities for strengthening partnership and cooperation at all levels and exchanging
experiences in countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism.
Furthermore, to address the evolving transnational threat posed by the terrorist group and its
affiliates member states and the UN system should continue to strengthen and promote the
effective use of necessary tools and measures.
It is essential that we jointly search for ways of addressing the issues of poverty, the negative
impact of globalization, preventing and resolving conflicts. There is also a need to strengthen an
intercultural and interfaith dialogue, mutual trust and tolerance.
In this context, the United Nations remains a critically important platform for achieving
consensus on the main issues of international security and development, as well as for
coordination of joint actions of the international community in addressing challenges and threats
of the contemporary world.
Madam President,
Peace is the main prerequisite for creating equitable and sustainable societies across the world.
Therefore, we believe that stable peace in the Middle East can be achieved only through a
comprehensive settlement of the crisis, which in turn will contribute to enhancing global security.
We support international and regional efforts aimed at restoring and strengthening peace and
stability in the Middle East, including the efforts towards resumption and acceleration of the
credible negotiations within the Middle East peace process.
We also support the international strategy for a comprehensive settlement and post-conflict
rehabilitation in Afghanistan. We need to strengthen our assistance to the Government of

Afghanistan, especially during Afghanistan s Transformation Decade (2015-2024).

3

Urgent socio-economic recovery is a must for development and prosperity of Afghanistan.
Targeted assistance to this war-torn country aimed at economic recovery, strengthening the
social sphere and creation of new jobs should be expanded. To this end, the involvement of
Afghanistan in the process of multifaceted regional cooperation is critical for the success of the
efforts undertaken by the international community.
We are willing to take part in the rehabilitation of the social and economic infrastructure of
Afghanistan through connecting the transport arteries of our two countries, creating an energy

bridge CASA-1000, providing the Afghan population with essential commodities and training
specialists.
Distinguished colleagues,

We are in the third year of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and its sustainable
development goals.
The recent High-Level Political Forum has vividly demonstrated that despite certain progress
there are early signs that the countries are not on track to reach SDGs by 2030.
It is alarming to observe this situation, particularly at the stage, when the countries just started
incorporating/aligning the 2030 Agenda with their national development strategies.
The mistakes of the MDG era should not be repeated.
For this reason, there is an urgent need to step up efforts on all fronts aimed at achieving our
ambitious goal - to transform our world for better by 2030.
The first step to be undertaken is to strengthen the means of implementation, especially for the
developing countries. Mobilization of financial resources, including ODA, long-term investments,
revitalized global partnerships, capacity building and transfer of environmentally sound
technologies to the developing countries are needed to adequately and timely attain SDGs by
2030.
Secondly, the national development efforts need to be supported by an enabling international
economic environment. It is essential to revitalize international trade and investments - the main
engines of economic growth and development.
Effective regional cooperation should also facilitate achieving sustainable development.
As we pledged to leave no one behind in our collective journey, it is imperative to recognize that
each country faces specific challenges in achieving the 2030 Agenda, in particular, the most
vulnerable countries such as the African countries, LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS. Therefore, we need
to take into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development of those
vulnerable countries and scale-up our assistance to them.
With that in mind, we supported and welcomed the UN Secretary-General s UN development
system reform aimed at enhancing the UN contribution to sustainable development. We believe
that the new changes will transform the UN system and will make it more capable of supporting
the 2030 Agenda and delivering better on the ground.
Madam President,

4

2018 was an important year not only for Tajikistan, the country which actively advances the
water agenda but to the entire water community across the globe.
We witnessed a series of milestone events, starting in Brazil with the 8th World Water Forum in
Brazil, then the Launch of the Water Decade in New York, followed by the High-Level
International Conference on International Decade for Action Water for Sustainable
Development, 2018-2028 in Dushanbe, and culminating in New York with the HLPF 2018.
Each of the above events had a profound impact and made a significant contribution to the
overall advancement of SDG 6 and other water-related goals of the 2030 Agenda.
For instance, the joint United Nations and Tajikistan High-Level International Conference on the
Water Decade in Dushanbe on June 20-22, 2018 brought together around 1500 people from
111 countries of the world.
The Conference also provided a timely and necessary platform for elaborating
recommendations in the run-up to the HLPF where the SDG 6 had been reviewed.

Additionally, it helped among other things:
- to increase attention to the water-related SDGs and targets at all levels, as well as to the
interlinkages between different goals and targets;
- Strengthen cooperation and partnership at all levels to achieve water-related SDGs;
- Better understand how water contributes to achieving sustainability and how the lack of
sustainability impacts water resources;
- Discuss the role of the Dushanbe Conferences for the implementation of the Water for
Sustainable Development Decade;
- Moreover, most importantly, to discuss the importance of specific means of implementation,
including monitoring, financing, capacity development, innovation, technology, knowledge,
information, data, best practices, as well as promoting advocacy, networking and encouraging
partnerships for action.
Encouraged by the success of the Dushanbe Conference and fulfilling the mandate of
Resolution 71/222, which declared the period of 2018-2028 as an International Decade for
Action Water for Sustainable Development , Tajikistan is going to submit a draft proposal to the
General Assembly on the mid-term review of the implementation of the Decade this fall.
We sincerely hope that based on the success of the Water Decade Resolution, which was co¬
sponsored in 2016 by the majority of member states the abovementioned draft resolution will
enjoy your similar valuable support this time as well.
Thank you for your attention.

5

