Statement by the Head of the delegation of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

13"^ session of the United Nations General Assembly

New York, 27*'' September 2018

REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
President

Speech by the
President of the Republic of Macedonia,

His Excellency, Dr. Gjorge ivanov,
delivered at the 73*^" Session of the

United Nations General Assembly

New York, 27 September 2018

Distinguished Madam President of the UN General Assembly,
Distinguished Mr. Secretary-General,
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

This year, we are celebrating 100 years since the end of the First World War. The
League of Nations was supposed to safeguard peace. However, it failed. The United
Nations rose from the ashes of the Second World War and were built over a world

destroyed by fascism, Nazism, racism and colonialism. By adopting the United Nations
Charter, a brave generation of leaders gave hope to the unprivileged, the oppressed,
the denied, that they will be able to exercise their right to self-determination.
70 years ago, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights became another gleam of
hope for humanity. This hope became more realistic through the work of the United
Nations and its numerous programs. Through peacekeeping missions, arms control,
non-proliferation treaties and the fight against terrorism and international organized
crime we build a safer world. The Sustainable Development Goals help us focus our
energy on reducing poverty, eradicating illnesses, spreading education, clean water and
sanitation, and creating opportunities for the youth. With the Paris Agreement we fight
climate change and try to build communities and nations resilient to disaster risks. As a
result, millions of people today are living better lives then they did a decade ago. All
these achievements would be unimaginable had we not united our efforts through the
United Nations.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

As President of the Republic of Macedonia, I can righteously say that the Macedonian
people participated in the creation of the post-World War II order. We were at the right
side of history, because even back in 1941, we started fighting the evil that was fascism
and Nazism.

The Macedonian state participated in the creation of the United Nations. In 1945, the
Federative Democratic Yugoslavia was one of the founders of the United Nations. As a
constitutive Republic with a right to self-determination to secession, Macedonia was a
co-founder of the United Nations.

As a state within that federation, we participated in the adoption of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights; in the international pacts on civil and political, economic,
social and cultural rights that guarantee human dignity, the right to self-determination
and the right to sovereign equality of states.
On September 8, 1991, making use of our sovereign right to self-determination and
secession, in a peaceful way, we left the collapsing federation and we proclaimed an
independent and sovereign Republic of Macedonia.

This is what the great injustice is all about. We were not allowed to enjoy the privileges
of the organization and the documents in whose creation we once participated. We
were denied the sovereign right to call ourselves by our name, as if an ordinary
administrative region in Greece (bearing the same name) has a bigger right in
international relations than a sovereign state such as the Republic of Macedonia.
25 years ago, on April 8, 1993, the Republic of Macedonia became a member of the
United Nations. And yet, in this community of equals before the law, the Republic of
Macedonia was admitted as less equal, with a derogated legal personality and a
violated right to self-determination.

Today, 25 years later, the talks within the United Nations should end by the adoption of
the so-called Prespa Final Agreement that according to some, should put an end to the
name dispute with Greece and open the way to membership of the Republic of
Macedonia in the European Union and NATO.
The Settlement begins with a grand preamble whose formulations would make even the
authors of the Universal Declaration quite envious. Ironically, the Prespa Agreement
violates the same universal principles and standards that it refers to in its preamble,
including the right to human dignity. Out of all the rights that have been violated, I wish
to draw your attention to one - namely, the right to self-determination.

The right of self-determination means that only the nation itself has the right to
determine its destiny, that no one has the right forcibly to interfere in the life of the
nation, to destroy its schools and other institutions, to violate its habits and customs, to
repress its language, or curtail its rights. The right of self-determination means that a
nation may arrange its life in the way it wishes. It has the right to arrange its life on the
basis of autonomy. It has the right to complete secession. Nations are sovereign, and all
nations have equal rights.

The right to self-determination is the source of the right of people to choose their own
name and the name of the state they created. The right to choose a name is an
inalienable part of the right to self-determination. Only by respecting the right to selfdetermination will the United Nations be relevant for all peoples. As a people, we have
been bearing the name Macedonians for centuries, and as a state for 74 years - even
before the existence of the United Nations. Our attachment to this name was confirmed

when, 27 years ago, we used our right to self-determination and proclaimed an
independent and sovereign Republic of Macedonia.
Still, with the Prespa Agreement, Greece is imposing a new name and is asking for an
erga omnes implementation - both for international and domestic use.

It is foreseen

that we change our Constitution, whereby Greece would become the ultimate authority
that would approve constitutional amendments. Through this settlement, Greece would
be given a permanent monitoring over how we name ourselves, but also over how you.
Member States of the United Nations, will address us. Greece will be authorized to
rename our institutions, to censor the contents of schoolbooks for our children, to

prevent citizens from expressing their Macedonian identity. This also regulates the
appellation of our Macedonian language. A very important part of our way of life will
depend on Greek will. It is a censorship of the world and an auto-censorship of the
collective conscience of Macedonian people. It is violence against our historical
memory. There are hundreds of thousands of pages of documents and testimonies in
the UN archives, detailing what the Greek state used to do to Macedonians in Greece.
Now, with the Prespa Agreement, the Greek state wants to do the same to the
Macedonians in the Republic of Macedonia. The aim is to limit the use of the name
Macedonians to the smallest possible space - and that is the space between our two
ears, all while keeping our mouth closed. It is a flagrant violation of the right to selfdetermination.

However, this Prespa Agreement is just a bitter fruit of a tree that has been poisoned a
long time ago. It is a detrimental compromise based on the 1995 Interim Accord. At a
time when we were internationally isolated, the Interim Accord achieved under the
auspices of the United Nations was supposed to be a guarantee that Greece would not
block our integration in international organizations. However, there is a serious problem
in this sense as well. No one can transfer to another more rights than they have
themselves. And yet, with Article 5 of the 1995 Interim Accord and under the UN-led
process, Greece was allowed to negotiate with the Republic of Macedonia about its
name. It is a violation of the right to self-determination.
The Interim Accord itself is not without its own roots. It stems from Resolutions 817 and

845 of the United Nations Security Council in 1993. Although it notes that the Republic
of Macedonia fulfills the criteria for UN membership contained in article 4 of the Charter,
the Security Council concludes nevertheless that there is a difference regarding the
name of the state, conditioning the membership of the Republic of Macedonia with the
acceptance of a provisional reference and an obligation to discuss about the name
issue. That formulation is nothing else but a euphemism for violating the right to self determination.

And thus we arrive at the root of the problem.

The right to self-determination was violated when the Republic of Macedonia was
admitted to the United Nations. The Interim Accord and the Prespa Agreement have
been adopted in order to justify that violation. You should know that the text of that socalled Prespa Agreement was prepared without my knowledge and without my consent
as President of the Republic of Macedonia. Moreover, the Agreement violates a clause
of our domestic law which is of fundamental importance.
OthenA^ise said, the knot that started entangling with Resolutions 817 and 845 and the
Interim Accord, has now, with the Prespa Agreement, taken the shape of a hangman's
noose. The Republic of Macedonia is now asked to commit a legal and historical
suicide, so that the legal abolishment of Macedonian people could then be interpreted
as its own will. I wonder what this says about global leadership and shared
responsibility of the United Nations?

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Greece insists on an erga omnes innplementation of the imposed name, thus making the
violation of the right to self-determination erga omnes as well. However, the
International Court of Justice has stated in its judgment of June 30, 1995 that the right
to self-determination has indeed an erga omnes effect. This very important decision
was neglected in the preparation of the Interim Accord, three months later.
It is said that the Macedonian case is a unique one in the United Nations. However, the
UN archives have registered an almost identical case in which a member state denies
the right of membership to an applicant country because of its name. I say almost,
because the request of that member state to block the entry of the other country was
ignored by the United Nations. All of this happened after our precedent.
I am asking: Why is this not valid in the case of the Republic of Macedonia? Are all
states not equally sovereign? Are the United Nations more relevant for some, and less
relevant for other peoples?

Again, we see an unprincipled Athens victorious over a peace-loving Melos, showing
that the stronger do what they can, and the weaker do what they must. The Prespa
Agreement places us in a fait accompli situation, in which we are told - you are smaller,
you are weaker, and therefore you must accept Athens' ultimatum. Instead of being
rewarded, we have been punished for our peace-loving nature. It seems to be forgotten
that the United Nations were created by visionaries who wanted an order in which even
the smallest and the weakest of peoples would be protected. This because the respect
of the rights of small peoples and states is a barometer for the observance of the
international charter on human rights.
Aristotle claimed that whoever is not part of the polis is either a beast or a god. What
the individual used to be to the ancient polis, is in a way, what the state is to the modern
cosmopolis today. Greece is acting as if it is not bound by the rules of international
order. With this attitude, I wonder in which category would Aristotle classify the cradle
of democracy today.

If the United Nations are incapable of giving force to a righteous law, then they will only
legitimate unrighteous force. And international order cannot be preserved by violating
international law.

For a long time, we were persuaded that there is no other way. But through the fruits,
we recognized the tree. Through this Prespa Agreement, we saw that we have been
misled to search for a solution that would mean erosion of the right to selfdetermination.

How should we undo this complicated know, this noose placed around our neck? The

unraveling should begin where everything else began - with the violation of the right to
self-determination.

The Vienna Convention on Treaties states very clearly that every agreement contrary to

the ius cogens standards is null and void. According to Article 1, Item 2 and Article 55
of the UN Charter, one of those ius cogens standards is the right to self-determination.
Article 5 of the 1995 Interim Accord specifies negotiations on the right to selfdetermination, which makes it contrary to this ius cogens standard. This, Ladies and
Gentlemen, means that the entire 1995 Interim Accord is null and void, and with it, the
Prespa Agreement that stems from it.

No one has the right to bring into question the decision of the people to choose their
name and the name of the country they created. It is a decision deriving from the right
to self-determination established as an absolute right of all peoples.

Only the right to self-determination, and not its violation, can have an erga omnes effect.
Distinguished participants,

As I am speaking here, in my country, the Republic of Macedonia, they are counting the
last hours before the referendum on which my fellow citizens have been asked to
express themselves on the Prespa Agreement.

In these past few weeks, many high profile foreign representatives visited the Republic
of Macedonia. I know that many of them sincerely wish to help the Republic of
Macedonia become part of the European Union and NATO. And I thank them for their
good intentions from the bottom of my heart. But I am afraid that they too have been
misled. Their message is that if the referendum fails and the Prespa Agreement is not
accepted, then we should not hope for membership in NATO and the European Union.
And I ask them - if you take away our hope, what will we be left with? Help us by
unblocking the process of EU and NATO membership of the Republic of Macedonia
without violating the right to self-determination in the process.

Many of them have been persuading Macedonian citizens to accept the Greek proposal.
I ask them, would they accept a derogation of the right to self-determination of their own
peoples and countries? Would they accept interference in their internal affairs, a breach
of sovereignty and political independence? Why are then we asked to accept something
that no one else in the world would accept?

Do not try to persuade us to eat from this poisoned fruit.
poisonous tree and its poisonous fruit to be rooted out.

It is high time for this

Therefore, in these last hours before the referendum silence, I wish to convey a
message to my fellow citizens in the Republic of Macedonia.

Voting on a referendum is your right, and not an obligation. In accordance with Article
7, Item 3 of the Referendum Law, 'no one shall be held responsible for voting or not
voting in a referendum'. Every citizen has the right to decide how to act as regards this
referendum - to go out and vote, or stay home and boycott.
Just as the referendum on September 8, 1991 led to sovereignty and independence,
this referendum on September 30 may lead to a state of subordination and dependence
towards another country.
if this referendum succeeds in accordance with law, then not only will the name of the
existing country be changed, but a new, semi-sovereign country will be created, with a
new name and a new internal and international legal identity. We will be a state only by
name, but not in substance, because others will regulate our way of life.
However, if the referendum fails, a new possibility will arise. A possibility to discuss and
explore new options for resolving the issue in accordance with international law, and by
respecting our fundamental right to self-determination.
To renew the national
consensus that we achieved at the beginning of our independence.
It does not take courage to capitulate. It takes courage to persist in the realization of
the right to self-determination and preserve the sovereignty and independence of a
country. It takes courage to tell the truth.
This September 30th will be decisive for our future. But at the same time, for centuries

in our tradition, September 30th has been the day when we celebrate Faith, Hope and
Love which arise from Wisdom.

Do not lose the faith in yourselves, because the future of the Republic of Macedonia
depends on you. Do not lose the hope and patriotic love for the Republic of Macedonia,
because only as a sovereign and independent country it can be a guardian of your
freedom and human dignity. As a citizen, I have made my decision. On September
30th, I will not go out to vote. I believe that you, my fellow citizens, will make a wise
decision.

I also wish to address you, representatives of United Nations Member states. This
irrational dispute has had detrimental consequences for the Republic of Macedonia and
its citizens.
Due to Greek blockades, we were denied the right to prosperity.
Unfortunately, all of this has reflected on the sustainability of the Macedonian
multiethnic, multireligious and multilingual society. A society which has actively
contributed to peace, stability and security in the region and in Europe for the past 27
years.

The position of official Athens is not only contrary to international law and the decision
of Macedonian citizens, it also goes against the will of almost 140 member states of the
United Nations which have recognized the fundamental right to self-determination of the
Republic of Macedonia and use its constitutional name.

As President of the Republic of Macedonia, I urge all states that already recognized the
Republic of Macedonia and established diplomatic relations under its constitutional
name, not to change their decisions. Demonstrate your sovereignty by remaining

faithful to your principled decisions, made without any kind of pressure. Help us by
being the guardians of our right to self-determination, thus safeguarding your right to
self-determination.

Modern history has shown that the Balkans are the birthplace of precedents. If we are
turned into detrimental precedents that limit our sovereignty and political independence,
then it is only a question of time when those will be applied in some of your states. What
does this say about the relevance of United Nations for all peoples, about leadership
and shared responsibility?
I have always been an advocate and an active contributor to the building of a true and
lasting partnership between the Republic of Macedonia and Greece, as well as

friendship and trust between Macedonian and Greek societies. However, if the only
way to accommodate the irrational demands of the Greek side is through imposed
measures on the Macedonian side, what we get are relations without trust. This
agreement does not bring Macedonian and Greek people together - it sets them apart.

Greek and Macedonian society should learn how to live together in spite of their
deepest differences. In order to reach a real, sustainable and lasting agreement, we
need dialogue instead of monologue, arguments instead of imposing by force, mutual
respect instead of denial.
Only by supporting such a fair approach, the United Nations will be relevant in our case,
and will demonstrate leadership and shared responsibility. The United Nations will only
be relevant if they respect their own principles.
Dear friends,

Perhaps, even as I speak, there are statements being written condemning this speech.
Most often, the first reaction to truth is hatred.

Truth uncovers lies, it uncovers

unfulfilled promises and guilty consciousness. And there is a lot of guilty consciousness
involved in the Macedonian case.

However, truth also liberates and allows for the

acceptance of guilt, for correction of mistakes and healing of the wounds from the
violation of our fundamental right to self-determination and human dignity. And the
simple truth is that we are Macedonians and our country is the Republic of Macedonia.
By respecting this simple truth for our identity, you respect our human dignity which is
built in the foundations of freedom, justice and peace in the world.
Thank you.

8

statement by the Head of the delegation of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

73'^'' session of the United Nations General Assembly

New York, 27*'' September 2018

