Stateme t of

HIS MAJESTY KING TUPOU VI

SOVEREIGN AND HEAD OF STATE OF THE KINGDOM OF TONGA

on the occasion of the
General Debate
at the Seventy-third Session
of the United Nations General Assembly
Wednesday, 26th September 2018
United Nations Headquarters, New York

Check Against Delivery

Madam President,
I congratulate you on the assumption of your presidency of the 73rd Session of the United
Nations General Assembly. I assure you that the Tonga delegation will fully support your
able leadership.
I express our gratitude to your predecessor, His E cellency Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, for his
successful and able leadership of the Assembly at its 72nd Session, in particular making the
work of the Assembly be people-centered, by striving for peace and a decent life for all, on a
sustainable planet.
I also commend His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres for the ongoing stewardship of the
Secretariat. Tonga fully supports the ongoing work he is undertaking on reform, including the
all-important review of the United Nations multi-country offices in the Pacific Islands region.
Madam President,
My delegation and I congratulate you also on your theme as being both timely and relevant.

Making the United Nations relevant to all people: Global leadership and shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies aptly reflects who we are as
a collective, ensuring the work of the United Nations has meaning to those that matter most our peoples - and we welcome your theme as the guiding principle for our work this session.
Madam President,
In contributing towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

and its sustainable development goals (SDGs), including the internationally agreed blueprint
for the sustainable development of small island developing States (SIDS), the SAMOA
Pathway, Tonga has made both Agreements an integral part of its national planning
processes. The government s priority agenda from year 2018 to 2021 aligns with 13 of the 17
SDGs namely Goals, 1 to 4, 6 to 9, and 13 to 17.
Madam President,
The High-Level Political Forum (HLPF) remains an important means which Tonga endorses,
for the follow-up, monitoring, and accountability of commitment by member states through

Voluntary National Reviews which are linked to the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda. Tonga looks forward to presenting its first Voluntary National Report (VNR)

report to the HLPF in 2019.
The HLPF will also dedicate a day at its high-level ministerial segment to the mid-term

review of the SAMOA Pathway in 2019. Tonga was pleased to host the Pacific regional
preparatory meeting for the mid-term review of the SAMOA Pathway in June this year of
which its outcome report forms the latest iteration of the Pacific s sustainable development
aspirations. Tonga looks forward to engaging with other SIDS and partners in Samoa at the
end of next month to produce the final inter-regional report for the midterm review of the
SAMOA Pathway for consideration at the HLPF next year.

2

We recognize the important contribution of the United Nations Office of the High
Representative for Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing countries, and Small
Island Developing States, the United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs

and the United Nations ESCAP Pacific office in this regard.
Madam President,
Tonga welcomes the convening of the 3rd High-level Meeting on the Prevention and Control
of Non-Communicable Diseases tomorrow. Combatting the threat NCDs presents to
individuals, fa ilie and communities, has been recognized as being grossly underfunded
given its magnitude.
In Tonga, we are pleased to inform of commendable reductions in the prevalence of tobacco
smoking and alcohol consumption. Tongan people are eating healthier food and involved
more in physical activities. We are, however, not without challenges as evidenced, for
example, in the rising obesity rates.
The Tongan Government is addressing the issue by making unhealthy food choices more
expensive and healthier food choices cheaper for the Tongan public.
Madam President,
Climate Change continues to pose significant security threats to us as Island States. Pacific
Leaders in Nauru earlier this month endorsed an expanded concept of security in their
Communique and the Boe Declaration linking, inter alia, climate change and threats to
international peace and security. In this regard, Tonga welcomes the establishment of the
Group of Friends on Climate and Security to further highlight the nexus between the threats
of climate change with threats to international peace and security.
We note with concern the devastating impacts of climate change on our marine environment.
Baselines that determine our territorial boundaries, once established under the UN
Convention of the Law of the Sea, should not be affected and should remain unchanged
despite the effects of sea level rise. Our Sovereignty must not be compromised by climate
change and we welcome the work of the International Law Commission on this critically
important and timely issue for consideration of the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly.
Tonga looks forward to taking our important work forward at the 24th Session of the UN
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and strongly addressing the adverse impacts of
climate change, and urgent need for innovation in adaptation for SIDS under the leadership of
Poland in December.
Madam Presi ent
Tonga has engaged in this year s first intergovernmental conference on the conservation and
sustainable use of the biological diversity in the high seas and the seabed and we are hopeful that a
gradual convergence of views will result in a zero draft of a legally binding in trument for
consideration at the second and third meetings of the Inter-governmental Conference in
March and August next year.

Tonga has also continued its engagement at the International Seabed Authority ensuring the
appropriate management of the resources of the Area. Tonga is grateful to the members of
the Authority for its re-election this year to the Council and we look forward to working
together in the development of the important draft Exploitation regulations.
Tonga also looks forward to hosting the first Regional International Seabed Authority
workshop in early 2019, to explore the benefits of seabed mining to the blue economy of
Pacific Islands and to progressing the development of a regional treaty on deep sea mining

We would like to acknowledge Italy s ongoing partnership with Tonga through the Joint
Committee in strengthening Tonga s capacity in the field of the environment and ocean. We
also acknowledge the work of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, the Commonwealth
Secretariat, and the Pew Charitable Trust on the Regional Treaty.
Madam President
Tonga commissioned its first Independent Power Producer-owned Solar Fa m last year and
strongly believes that it can achieve its 50% by 2020 renewable energy target through more
and stronger public-private partnership arrangements.
Tonga wishes to acknowledge the partnership it has established with the Government of
Austria, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, and the Pacific
Community, to establish the Pacific Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency - a
specialised regional entity to support private sector investments in renewable energy and
energy efficiency in the Pacific Islands.
We would also like to recognize and acknowledge the announcement made by the
Government of Norway of its commitment to provide US Dollar 2 million in support of the
important work of the Centre.
Madam President,
Finally, sustainable development, whether it be, inter alia, through good health and well¬
being, climate action, life below water, or affordable and clean energy, can only be realized
through international peace and security. We continue to look to the Security Council to
protect the innocent from threats to international peace and security in whatever form, be they
traditional threats such as armed conflict, or newer threats like climate change, to ensure no
one is left behind.

May Almighty God guide and bless you, and all the member states of the United Nations,
their respective Governments, and our peoples.

Thank you

4

