TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
PERMANENT MISSION OF THE REPUBLIC OF TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO TO THE UNITED NATIONS
633 Third Avenue, 12th Floor0 New York, N.Y. 10017 ® Tel.: (212) 697-7620 ® Fax: (212) 682-3580

' CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY

STATEMENT
BY
SENATOR THE HONOURABLE DENNIS MOSES,
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AND CARICOM AFFAIRS

OF
THE REPUBLIC OF TRI IDAD AND TOBAGO
DURING THE GENERAL DEBATE OF THE
73rd SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

29 September 2018
General Assembly Hall
United Nations Headquarters

Madam Preside t,
I am honoured to address this eminent congress of nations seized with advancing the international
agenda towards the realisation of international peace, sustainable development and the well-being
of all humankind.
On beh lf of the Governme t an people of the Re ublic of Trinidad nd Tob go, I extend
congr tulations to you on your election as Presi ent of the 73rd Session of the United Nations
General Assembly.
As we continue to pursue gender equality across all borders and spheres of endeavour, your
assumption to the seat of the Presidency of the General Assembly is further impetus for global
rethinking and acceptance of female leadership, and toward strengthening the global pursuit of
gender parity, empowerment and equality.
Allow me to express, further, the gratitude of the delegation of Trinidad and Tobago to your
predecessor, His Excellency Miroslav Lajcak, whose leadership helped advance the efforts of the
United Nations to undertake an ambitious task of system-wide reform. The reform agenda marks
a new and emerging approach to multilateral institutionalism and presents an opportunity to
transform the United Nations into a dynamic body capable of better responding to the needs and
challenges reflecting the diversity of its membership.
Madam Presi ent,

This year s theme, Making the United Nations Relevant to All People: Global Leader hip and
Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable Societies , compels us to reflect
on the nexus between the UN’s ambitious and comprehensive reform agenda and our shared
pursuit of a sustainable future for all.
The myriad multidimensional threats that litter the international development landscape threaten
our efforts to ard universal sustainable development, the eradication of extreme poverty, peace
and security and the enjoyment of fundamental human rights by all.
The existential threat posed by unmitigated climate change and global temperature increase, the
undeniable challenge of extreme poverty, violent extremism, gender-based violence, and the
spread of new and infectious diseases is one that is best faced together, as Member States of the
United Nations. As the bastion of international peace and security, human rights, sustainable
development and the rule of law, the United Nations, as an institution, is compelled to adopt a shift
in its approach to ensure adequate, effective and efficient responses to the challenges of our time.
It is on this basis that the Government of Trinidad and Tobago reaffirms its support for the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s reform agenda, in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions.
As we pursue the cost-savings and efficiencies associated with the reform agenda, however, it is
imperative that we do not lose sight of the foundational principles, values and overarching
objectives of this august institution. In this regard, I am reminded of the words of former UN
Secretary-General, the late Kofi Annan. He reminded us that, even though the United Nations is
an organisation of States, the Charter is written in the name of We the peoplesP Ultimately, this
is the role of the United Nations: to serve the needs and hopes of people everywhere. Peo le must
be at the ce tre of our common endeavour.

1

Having recognised this infinite truth, Madam Presi e t, t e Government of Trinidad and Tobago,
through wide consultation, developed a na ional development strategy, titled Vision 2030 . This
multidimensional and inclusive development policy places our people, our greatest resource, at the
centre of our pursuit of the sustainable development goals.
If we are to truly ensure no one is left behind, it is imperative that we advance our efforts to ensure
equitable access to opportunity and mobility for the most vulnerable. Those who have long been
left behind must now be positioned to participate in society as equals.
By its very nature, the scope of the 2030 Agenda speaks to the wide range of issues that challenge
global sustainable development. Notwithstanding the global relevance of these challenges, it is
widely acknowledged that asymmetries exist with regard to the impact of external shocks on Small

Island developing States (SIDS), such as Trinidad and Tobago and the Caribbean region.
The Government of Trinidad and Tobago recognises the Samoa Pathway as an essential
component in the catalogue of development frameworks to specifically guide in the sustainable
development of SIDS. Accordingly, Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the San Pedro Declaration
adopted at the Caribbean Regional Preparatory Meeting of SIDS in Belize, and looks forward to

participating in the High Level Review Summit of the SAMOA Pathway in 2019. Moreover,
Trinidad and Tobago takes this opportunity to reinforce the principle that SIDS continue to be a
special case for sustainable development, given our complex and intricate challenges.
As we and our regional partners prioritise the unique threats to the development of our people, the
2030 Agenda provides an important guide in our efforts to ensure that none of our citizens are left
behind.
In manifesting the intent of the Agenda, we have come to appreciate the importance of prioritising

the wellbeing of all of our citizens. In this rega d, Trinidad and Tobago and our CARICOM
counterparts are taking action to ddress the threat that high incidences of non-communicable
diseases (NCDs) poses to our region. These diseases ravage our hu an resources, burden our
healthcare systems and undermine our development efforts.

Since the adoption of the Port of Spain Declaration on NCDs by CARICOM Heads of Government
in 2007, and the landmark United Nations High-level Meeting on the prevention and control of
NCDs in 2011, Trinidad and Tobago has implemented a number of strategies for controlling and
reducing NCDs.
Our National Strategic Plan for the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases 2017-

2021 aims to harness the collective efforts of both the public and private sector in respect ofNCD
prevention and control.
In this regard, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the adoption of the political
declaration of the Third High-level Meeting on the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases. We remain fully committed to addressing NCDs and to ensuring that it remains on the
international agenda.
By raising the standard of living, improving the educational and healthcare systems, and providing

equal access to opportunities, Trinidad and Tobago s Vision 2030 is actively pursuing the
development of a resilient, equitable and healthy society that places all people at the nucleus of
our sustainable development efforts.

2

However, M dam President, no challenge is more pressing than that of climate change. For small

island developing States (SIDS) like Trinidad and Tobago, casting doubt on the scientific truth
behind climate change only serves to distract and to delay the urgent and ambitious action that is
needed to confront the existential threat posed by global temperature increase.
Earlier this year, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago deposited its instrument of ratification
to the Paris Agreement, thus formalising its steadfast commitment to the principles and goals of
the Agreement. As our national contribution to achieving the overarching objective of the Paris
Agreement, Trinidad and Tobago has committed to reducing cumulative greenhouse gas emissions
by 15 per cent from industry, power generation and the transport sector by the year 2030.
As a State Party, Trinidad and Tobago will be actively engaged in the negotiating process under

the UNFCCC to operationalise the Paris Agreement on a scale that will result in achieving the
long-term temperature goal, and further limit the increase in global temperatures to 1.5 degrees
Celsius. It is also hoped that the operationalisation process will catalyse international cooperation
on mitigation, adaptation and climate finance, to this end.
Madam Preside t,
Our commitment to the Paris Agreement reflects Trinidad and Tobago s overall responsibility to
support inte ational efforts to tackle shared environmental challenges, which include climate
change, ozone depletion, land degradation, loss of biodiversity, illegal trade of wildlife and the
movement of hazardous wastes.

As a twin-island state, the conservation and sustainable use of oceans, seas and marine resources
is critically important to the development priorities of Trinidad and Tobago. However, Trinidad
and Tobago is located in a region that is highly vulnerable to an unprecedented rate ofloss of
marine biodiversity and the impacts of unsustainable practices on the marine environment.
Therefore, we welcome the First Session of the Intergovernmental Conference to develop a legally
binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction. The
Government of Trinidad and Tobago looks forward to participating in the future sessions of the
intergovernmental conference in 2019 and 2020 to elaborate the text of the instrument, which will
ensure the protection and sustainable management of the common heritage of mankind for the
benefit of present and future generations.
Madam President,
One of the pressing challenges facing the region is the cessation of correspondent banking
relations, and the labelling of countries in the CARICOM region as non-cooperative tax
jurisdictions. This issue has severely destabilised the financial sectors of the region without due
consideration to the financial, human and technical constraints confronting our Member States.
As a result, the region’s efforts to bolster our economic stability and effectively engage in the
global financial system effectively have been stymied to the detriment of our economic growth
and progress. This has the potential to further erode the development gains achieved thus far. In

this regard, Trinidad and Tobago joins with other CARICOM Member States in reiterating our
commitment to ensuring compliance with globally accepted standards and calls on our
international partners to engage constructively on this issue.

3

Madam President,
In our collective journey towards sustainable development, the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago is fully convinced that the United Nations Development System, for the foreseeable future,
will remain a reliable partner to assist our country in its efforts to achieve the sustainable
development goals, and our Vision 2030 National Development Strategy.
With this in mind, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago welcomes the Secretary-General s
efforts to reposition the UN Development System to better support the implementation of the 2030

Agenda and the SAMOA Pathway, including through the reinvigorated Resident Coordinator
System. Trinidad and Tobago reiterates the importance of ensuring that the development system
adopts a more responsive and flexible approach to its development assistance, based on national
priorities and needs, while strengthening national ownership and leadership.
Madam President,
The United Nations has long recognised the interconnectedness between peace and development:
a symbiotic relationship, where one cannot exist without the other. Ongoing conflicts across the
world serve as stark reminders of the need to promote a positive, dynamic and participatory
international peace and security architecture, that is hinged on the spirit of mutual understanding
and cooperation between governments, international organizations, and civil society, and that is in
compliance with international obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.
The illegal trade in arms continues to affect the social and economic fabric of the Caribbean region,
including Trinidad and Tobago. This is a particularly applicable to the trade in small arms and
light weapons, which is linked to other transnational organized crime, such as drug trafficking. It
threatens the livelihood of our people, undermines the rule of law and challenges our efforts for a
peaceful, equitable and sustainable country.

On the global level, Trinidad and Tobago fully subscribes to the object and purpose of the Arms
Trade Treaty, which can be leveraged as a mechanism for reducing incidences of armed violence
in the region. Thus, since 2010, Trinidad and Tobago has tabled the biennial resolution on
Women, Disarmament, Non-proliferation and arms control, which encourages women s
participation in disarmament decision-making processes.
On the issue of denuclearization, Trinidad and Tobago holds the firm view that the use or the threat
of use of nuclear weapons constitutes a crime against humanity, and a violation of international
law, including the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Therefore, the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago remains robust in its support for the full and effective implementation of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and is actively treating with the issue of signature
and ratification.

4

Madam Presi ent,
Trinidad and Tobago has long recognised that international peace and security must be supported
by a robust international legal system, including in respect of international criminal justice.

Trinidad and Tobago, through the work of our former Prime Minister and President of Trinidad
and Tobago, the late Arthur N.R. Robinson, was at the vanguard of efforts towards the
establishment of the International Criminal Court two decades ago.
Trinidad and Tobago remains a fervent advocate of the Court, underscoring its importance and
legitimacy in various fora. We stand resolute in our commitment to support the mandate of the
ICC and promote the universality of the Rome Statue.

The delegation of Trinidad and Tobago wishes to make the point that, consistent with the principle
of complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statute, the Court s jurisdiction is only invoked when
States are unable or unwilling to prosecute those accused of committing the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community.
In fact, the late Kofi Annan stated at the adoption of the Rome Statute that, and I quote: Gradually
the world has come to realize that relying on each State or army to punish its own transgressors
is not enough. When crimes are committed on such a scale we know that the State lacks either the
power or the will to stop them.
Therefore, no individual or State that demonstrates full respect for international humanitarian law
and international human rights should fear the ICC. Those who fail to cooperate with the Court
are contributing to a culture of impunity that undermines the rule of law, but also denies justice to
victims of heinous crimes.
Madam President,
Our best efforts to strengthen multilateral peace and security will surely fall short unless there is
real and significant reform of the Security Council. While we welcome the continuation of the
inter-governmental negotiations on Security Council reform, Trinidad and Tobago remains
concerned that such discussions have not resulted in tangible progress towards a text-based
negotiation. Trinidad and Tobago urges the international community to work collaboratively
towards reforming the Security Council to better address current realities and challenges, including
those faced by small island developing States, as well as to improve the effectiveness and
credibility of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace and international security.
Madam President,
This year, the world has witnessed the unifying power of dialogue and understanding with the
recent Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity and the Unification of the Korean Peninsula
between the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Trinidad and
Tobago remains optimistic that this historic milestone will usher in a new era of peace, cooperation
and the denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula.

5

I>

Despite this positive development, in our own region, the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba continues to stand as the last vestige of the Cold War. In keeping with its
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations, and the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda,
which calls for no one to be left behind, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago reaffirms its
unceasing call for the cessation of the economic, commercial financial embargo against Cuba,
sooner rather than later.

Ma am Preside t,
At the heart of our sovereign nations, our cultures and our languages, lies an individual being, who,
at the very core, seeks a life of purpose, happiness and the opportunity to live in peace and
prosperity. The challenge of our time is to pursue and achieve a sustainable future for all in the
face of burgeoning threats to our shared humanity, including but not limited to the threats posed
by extreme poverty, rising inequality, climate change and protracted conflicts. Facing that
challenge requires deepened partnerships, meaningful dialogue, and an appropriate review of
established mechanisms and institutions that, if reformed, can exponentially improve our ability
to transform lives globally.
The Gover me t of Trini ad an Toba o remains unequivocally committed to the purposes
n rinciples of the Charter of the United N tions and to the achievement of the objectives
of the 2030 Agend for Sust inable Develo ment. We commit to continuing to work in good
faith with this august body that has long stood as the cornerstone of multilateralism, in the
face of unprecedented ch llenges and threats facing humanity, to ensure no one is left behind.
I thank you, Madam President.

6

