STATEMENT
BY THE PRESIDENT OF TURKMENISTAN
HIS EXCELLENCY
MR. GURBANGULY BERDIMUHAMEDOV
AT THE 73RD SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Dear Mr. (Mrs.) Preside t,

De r heads of deleg tio s,
Ladies nd ge tleme ,
First of all, allow me to congratulate Mrs. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces on

her election to the post of the 73rd session of the UN General Assembly and wish
her success in the forthcoming responsible work. I would also like to express my
appreciation to Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, President of the 72nd session on his
knowledgeable and effective work on this post.

Disti uished P rticip nts,
The current session of the General Assembly is taking place against the
background of complex trends in international politics. In spite of the efforts, of the
international community, primarily represented by the United Nations, situation in
a number of regions of the globe continues to remain complicated and we witness
a proliferation of conflict prone areas and simultaneously with this a decrease in
the general level of trust and mutual understanding in our views on the ways and
prospects of global development.
Under those circumstances the issue of ensuring general, reliable and long-term

security becomes all too apparent and acute thereby imposing the responsibility
for mankind s destiny on every state.

We believe that the United Nations is called upon to play the main and decisive
role in preserving the foundations of international order on the basis of the

principles of mutual respect and peaceful political dialogue. The validity of this
mission of the United Nations cannot be cast in doubt. The United Nations is the
only universal international organization designed to ensure multilateral

cooperation aimed at strengthening inte ational security and sustainable
development.

Turkmenistan believes that the current GA session is called upon to contribute
to the solution of the crisis of trust and strengthen mutual understanding among
member states. In this regard Turkmenistan advances the initiative of marking the
year 2019 as the year of Peace and Trust. Our initiative envisages elaboration of
specific measures aimed at reducing tensions, peaceful political and diplomatic
resolution of disputes and contradictions and adoption of appropriate responsible
and substantiated decisions.
Distinguished members of the delegations,
Ensuring long-term and comprehensive security represents a key issue fo the
Central Asian states.

Fight against terrorism is the most important issue of the regional agenda.
However, cooperation on disarmament matters, fight against drug trafficking and
omni-lateral economic support for Afghanistan is a no less important issue with
respect to ensuring security and stable development. In this regard we believe that

it is crucially important to involve Afghanistan in the implementation of major
energy, transport and communications projects as a full-fledged partner. We regard

this issue as a strategic guideline for Afghanistan, its role in regional and global
processes and the guarantee of the prosperity and well-being of the Afghan people.

By steadfastly working towards this goal our country is implementing the
project of building the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan - Pakistan-India (TAPI) gas
line, carrying out the construction of a power supply line and a fiber optic
communications network that are supported by inte ational partners and major
financial institutions. A new railway leading towa ds Afghanistan has also been
completed. We continue to provide humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan by

building social facilities, sending humanitarian aid convoys, training of qualified
national specialists for various segments of the Afghan economy and social sphere.

Disti g ished participa ts,
Turkmenistan has taken an active part in the4 elaboration of the Sustainable

Development Agenda for the period up to the year 2030 and has tabled a number
of specific proposals. Following the adoption by the World Summit of the Global

Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals our country was among the first

nations that embarked on the adaptation of the SDGs to its national plans and social
and economic development programmes. In this regard we have established the
appropriate standing mechanism for cooperation with the United Nations.
Implementation of the SDGs in Turkmenistan has an especially prominent
social orientation. By this we mean such important issues as ensuring food security
and improvement of people s nutrition, all-round promotion of a healthy way of

life, ensuring full gender equality by guaranteeing the rights and opportunities for
all women and girls, and creating the conditions for a comprehensive, equitable
and high-quality education. Parallel to this we devote great attention to achieving
the goal of ensuring the availability and rational use of water resources and
sanitation for all.

Disting ished Particip nts!
Turkmenistan firmly adheres to the principle stipulating that water is the
common heritage of all the nations of the planet and that equal and equitable access
to clean drinking water is the fundamental right of human beings. Development of
states, their economy and social sphere as. well as the level of well-being and

quality of life of the people directly depends on access to water resources and their
effective use. Therefore equality of rights, mutual respect and responsibility should
become the main criteria that determine relations among Central Asian states. By

steadfastly adhering to those p sitions Turkmenistan has always declared that
water and energy issues existing in our region should be resolved:
- First, on the basis of generally accepted rules of international law;
- Second, on the basis of the consideration of the interests of each country;
- Third, on the basis of active participation of international organizations and

primarily of the United Nations.
This is our principled position and proceeding from it we shall continue our
work on building effective negotiating mechanisms between state an inte ational
entities with a view to elaborating coordinated approaches. I am convinced that
only by doing so can we achieve positive results and ensure a stable and sustainable
balance of interests.

The issue of saving the Aral Sea stands prominently among the major topics of
cooperation between the countries of the region and the international community.
It is apparent that preservation of the Aral Sea can no longer be considered as an
internal regional problem. Its successful solution requires assistance from the

international community, an innovative purpose oriented and comprehensive

international approach and systematic participation of the United Nations in this
endevour. In this connection we have embarked on the implementation of

Turkmenistan s initiative regarding the elaborati n of a Special U Programme
for the Aral Sea basin and earmarking the Aral problem as a separate sphere of
Organization s work. I call on the United Nations member states to support our
initiative. The UN resolution on the cooperation between the United Nations and

the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea adopted by consensus on 18 April
this year can serve as a good basis for this.
Distin uished participants,
The Caspian Sea is yet another major issue. The signing of the Convention on

the legal status of the Caspian Sea by Heads of the Caspian Sea states on the
August 12 this year opens prospects for transforming the Caspian Sea region into
one of the strategic transit transport and energy hubs of international importance,
an area of broad investment, trade and economic activity and cooperation.

Turkmenistan stands ready to meaningfully discuss with all interested parties
the implementation of projects in those spheres that are fully economically and
commercially feasible and are beneficial for all potential participants, can
significantly influence strengthening of continental security and have a long-term
nature. It is no exaggeration to say that investment in those projects is an
investment in the future.

We highly value effective participation of the UN specialized agencies
epresented in Turkmenistan in the life of our country and its dynamic development
and well-being and I would like to express our specific gratitude to the personnel
of those agencies for their selfless work. I would also like to thank UN Secretary
General Mr. Antonio Guterres for his constant personal attention to UN
cooperation with Turkmenistan and support of our initiatives and endeavors.

