TUVALU

Presented by

PRIME MINISTER OF TUVALU
Honourable Enele Sosene Sopoang
at
The 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly
General Debate

September 27, 2017
New York

President of the General Assembly
Excellencies

Ladies and Gentlemen

1. It gives me great pleasure, on behalf of the Government and people of Tuvalu,
to address the General Assembly, and to congratulate you on your appointment to
the presidency of our 73rd Session. Tuvalu has full confidence in your leadership,
and that together with the Secretary General s support, to further advance our work.
2. Tuvalu also re-affirms its commitment to the noble values and principles of

the UN, of which it has high pride to be Member since we joined in the year 2000.
3. Tuvalu acknowledges with sincere affections the passing of the late Kofi
Anan, former Secretary General, and his outstanding contributions to this body,

leading us from the dusk of the past Century, into the dawn of the Twenty-First
Century.

73rd UNGA Session
4. President, we welcome the theme of the 73nd General Debate, Making the

United Nations Relevant for all people: Global Leadership and shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies.
5. It rightly reminds us that we now need responsible global leadership more
than ever. Leadership that values multilateralism, trust and the moral responsibility

to help those who need help. This is the leadership the world needs to succeed
against the defining global challenges of the UN SDGs in particular of climate
change and environmental degradation.

UNSG high level events during the high-level week
6. This year was characterized by the fear of a potential nuclear war as if we
have not learnt from the wrongs of the past. Now we have nuclear weapons that are
much more powerful than those dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
1

7. Numerous nuclear tests in our Pacific region have caused unimaginable
damages to the environment and health of our people. Some of our islands are still
coping with the effects of nuclear radiation decades after those nuclear tests. The
recent Pacific leaders meeting in Nauru reaffirmed our commitment to peace and
security in the Pacific region. Under the Boe Declaration on Pacific Regional
Security, we are calling for urgent actions not only on military, but on human
security issues as well.
8. In this spirit, Tuvalu two days ago, signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban

Treaty (CTBT), which offers the international community an opportunity to ban this
weaponry. We urge all of us to take up concrete actions to make our world safe.
Non-Communicable Diseases and Tuberculosis
9. Non-communicable diseases and tuberculosis hit the poor and vulnerable

particularly hard and drive them deeper into poverty. We commend the successful
outcomes of the high-level meetings of the General Assembly on NCDs and TB
convened by the UN Secretary General, but the rhetoric alone is not enough, they

must be followed by meaningful actions on the ground to drive healthy life-styles
and diets, supported by adequate financing and monitoring modalities to ensure
integrated progress.

10. Addressing this in a manner of urgency is critical, and to this end in Tuvalu,
we have introduced an all Friday afternoon sweat-breaks to all workers in work
places, and in the villages to encourage more active and healthy life-style, through

more physical activities like sporting, gardening, and fishing.
Climate Change and The Paris Agreement
11. For SIDS and LDCs, however, the achievement of the UN Sustainable
Development Goals, depends entirely on how we can address issues of climate

change. Current global warming trend spells a very bleak and miserable future for

2

SIDS, especially for low-lying atolls like Tuvalu. A future that demands huge
investments on mitigation and adaptation that are simply beyond our capabilities.
12. The Paris Agreement offers us a lifeline. But the current commitments in the

Paris Agreement constitutes only a third of what is needed to avoid catastrophic
consequences of climate change. This is a direct threat to our existence and survival.

13. As already established based on the IPCC s assessments, unless the global
community steps up our actions to significantly lower GHG emissions, SIDS like
Tuvalu will disappear completely within the next 30-50 years - disappear
completely. I repeat again what I said in COP21, Paris, just imagine if you were in
my shoes, how would you feel? And what would you do?
14. Climate change is a weapon of mass destruction. It is slaughtering fellow

human beings world-over. The UN cannot and must not allow the biggest GHG
emitters to turn away from their moral duty to urgently reduce GHG emissions, and

to save SIDS like Tuvalu with appropriate adaptation support. It will be shameful
for the whole of humanity to ever allow Tuvalu disappear. Every single year wasted
with no actions on climate change, draws Tuvalu a year closer to its total demise
from earth. But Tuvalu will never give up, we will fight to protect and save our
islands, our people, our culture, and our future.

15. We appeal to this Noble House not to allow this to happen. Tuvalu, whose
islands and lagoons were used by the American forces in the Second World War to
conquer the enemy in the Pacific, urges President Trump and the USA to re-join the
Paris Agreement, so we can all paddle together to save the world against our single
most threatening enemy of climate change. Failing this, Tuvalu strongly proposes
that we the signatories of the Paris Agreement must quickly return to Paris to
critically and urgently re-assess our mitigation pledges and dramatically increase our
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas pollution. We cannot allow one country to desert
the process and derail our efforts.

3

16. The next Conference of Parties in Poland is a critically important milestone
for climate change action. We must ensure that the Implementation Guidelines for
the Paris Agreement are concluded. We must also ensure that the Talanoa Dialogue

process leads to a strong political declaration and decision that responds to the IPCC
1.5 deg C report and sets a pathway for enhanced climate change action.
17. In this regard we seek a commitment from every nation to enhance their
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as a matter of urgency. On our own part,

Tuvalu is fully committed to shi ting to 100% renewable energy by 2020 despite our
negligent greenhouse gas emissions. I extend our deep appreciation to the

Governments of India and France for their initiative on solar energy development,
under the International Solar Alliance, and to the EU, NZ, Taiwan, Italy, Austria,
Japan and the World Bank for their support on energy efficiency and solar energy
development in Tuvalu.

18. I wish to acknowledge the efforts of notable members of the Security
Council in bringing climate change to the fore of its peace and security agenda.
This is a genuine commitment to addressing the most important challenge of our
time and the greatest single threat to humanity. It is our humble hope that the
whole of the Security Council membership can agree to have climate change as a
permanent item on its Agenda.
19. Madam President, we believe that the nexus between climate change and
security is fundamental. For a nation like Tuvalu our security and our future are
contingent on urgent action to address climate change. We therefore reiterate our

call for the appointment of a Special Representative of the UN Secretary General
on climate change and security. The Special Representative will hopefully create
the necessary catalyst for a UN wide response to climate change and security.
20. We also call on the Security Council to appoint a special rapporteur to
produce regular review of global, regional and national security threats caused by
climate change.
4

Global Compact on Migration
21. We welcome the successful conclusion of the intergove mental negotiation

on the Global Compact on Migration and applaud the spirit of responsible leadership
and multilateral cooperation to support the ever-increasing populations that are being
affected by conflicts and environmental crisis including climate change.

22. We believe however, that all human rights of climate change displaced people
should be protected under an international legal agreement. We therefore reiterate

the Tuvalu proposal for a UN Resolution on the establishment of a legal process to
protect the human rights of people displaced by climate change. The proposal is fully
supported by the Polynesian Leaders Group, the SIS Leaders, and in the Pacific
Island Country Leaders.

LDC Graduation
23 This year Tuvalu has proposed to remain an LDC because our ability to
achieve sustainable development is being severely compromised by our

vulnerability to climate change. We noted with appreciation the support that we
have received from development partners on our proposal.
24. However, it is our earnest belief that SIDS unique extreme vulnerabilities
must be considered as a fundamental criteria of graduation from the LDC category.

SIDS
25. The particular concerns of highly vulnerable SIDS, like Tuvalu, cannot be
ignored. In our NSSD, Te Kakeega III, our unique vulnerability is recognized as
enemy number one to SDGs achievement. In this regard we call on ECOSOC to

create a special category for SIDS so that we can be afforded special
considerations in a similar fashion to LDCs.

26. We note the UN Secretary General s recently released report on the

Assessment resulting from the evolving mandates of the small island developing
5

States units of the Secretariat . The expanded responsibilities of the SIDS unit in
UNDESA and the OHRLLS should be matched with expanded resources. We
strongly urge the UN Secretary General to make available additional resource for

these units. We also believe that all UN Agencies should identity and develop
special programs for SIDS.

27. We elcome the review of the S.A.M.O.A. pathway and hope that this
review will truly reflect and respond to the unique circumstances of SIDS and their
extreme economic, environmental and social vulnerability and direct action to

address this vulnerability.

28. In the South Pacific region, we are making small steps to address this

vulnerability. We are in the process of developing a Pacific Island Climate Change
Insurance Facility. We seek support from the UN wide system to assist us in

developing this Facility.
Ocean

29. Madam President, our small island economy is inextricably linked to the
oceans. The Oceans is us, our culture, our life and our survival. For us, it is the source

of life: food, ecosystems, biodiversity, freshwater, and economies. The ocean
presents our greatest hope to achieving sustainable livelihoods for our people,
security and survival. Flowever, with global warming, acidification, coral bleaching,

solid wastes and plastic pollution, inshore and off-shore fish-stocks on which
national economies dependent, are gravely affected. The UN must provide the
strongest leadership to drive genuine partnerships to address these issues.
30. It is therefore very important that the interests of small islands developing states
are reflected in the ongoing discussions on the conservation and sustainable use of

marine biological diversity including beyond areas of national jurisdiction. We seek
international cooperation that ensures our equal and fair participation in the
6

management and sharing of benefits from the oceans including in areas beyond
national jurisdictions.
Taiwan, Cuba, West Papua
31. Madam President, the exclusion of Taiwan from the UN systems denied its

23 million people their fundamental rights to participate, benefit and contribute to
the UN Sustainable Development Goals. Already Taiwan is a responsible and able
partner to Tuvalu and many countries around the world and could only do more if it

is allowed its rightful place and role in our global efforts.
32. The UN has to make the necessary arrangements to let Taiwan participate in
its meetings, activities, and mechanisms. Tuvalu strongly supports the ROC/Taiwan

active participation in UN specialized agencies including in the UNFCCC, WHO,
and ICAO.
33. In a similar manner, the long unilateral economic embargo on Cuba directly
constraints the development aspiration of the people of Cuba. It neglected the human

rights and the spirit of cooperation espoused in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.

34. Likewise, our United Nations must engage with the people of West Papua to
find lasting solutions to their struggles.
3 5. Madam President, the 203 0 Agenda is a plan of action for people, planet, and

prosperity, and was adopted on the basis of the principles of inclusiveness and
universality. We must therefore engage every country and every people for a
successful 2030 Agenda.

PIF 2019 in Tuvalu
36. Next year in August 2019, Tuvalu will host the 50th Pacific Islands Forum of
Leaders. I extend our humble invitation to all PIF Leaders, our friends and especially
7

our Development Partners, bilateral and multilateral, to join us in Tuvalu. We want
to put on record our deepest appreciation to the Government of Taiwan for their
generous support to help us prepare for this important regional event. Similarly I
want to acknowledge similar support from the Governments of India, Taiwan, and

the ROK to host the PIT summit.
37. On 1st of October, Tuvalu will celebrate its 40th Anniversary of Independence.

Whilst holding high our national pride in being an Independent Nation, we fully
acknowledge that Tuvalu would never have achieved such a status without the due
consideration of Members of this august Body to whom we offer our sincere
gratitude. In our stride, we acknowledge with deep appreciation the generosity of all

our development partners, particularly our traditional partners the Republic of China,
Taiwan, India, Republic of Korea, Australia, New, New Zealand, the EU, Japan,
UK, World Bank, and Asian Development Bank. As we paddle our canoe over the

next forty years, we seek for the continuing goodwill of the UN family, to further
advancing our achievements based on genuine and durable partnerships.
38. In conclusion, Tuvalu strongly believes that our collective effort to achieve

the sustainable development Agenda 2030, and to secure global peace, security and
prosperity, will be severely compromised unless we all paddle together to urgently
address climate change: to Save Tuvalu, to Save the world.

I thank you Madam President

TUVALU MO TE ATUA

8

