REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

ADDRESS

BY
RT HON DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA
PRIME MINISTER OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73*° SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY

27 SEPTEMBER 2018

NEW YORK

[Please check against delivery]

1

Excellencies Heads of State and Government,

President of the UN General Assembly,
Secretary General of United Nations,
Distinguished delegates,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I congratulate Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa on her election as

President of t e 73rd Session of the UN General Assembly and
assure her of Uganda s support. We are confident that she will

lead the Assembly effectively and successfully. I would also like to
express our gratitude to H.E. Mr Miroslav Lajcak, for his leadership
of the 72nd Session. I pay tribute to the Secretary-General, H.E.
Antonio Guterres, for his personal dedication and commitment to

the work of the United Nations.
The theme for this 73rd Session making United Nations relevant
to all people is very pertinent. Three years ago in this hall, we
adopted a universal and transformative Agenda 2030 for
sustainable development, to guide our efforts over the next fifteen
years. At the heart of the 2030 Agenda was a pledge to leave noone behind". It meant that the seventeen sustainable development

goals (SDGs) and targets should be met for everyone, with a
particular focus on the poorest, most vulnerable and furthest
behind - indeed those who are often the hardest to reach.
We in Uganda are devoting reasonable amount of time and

resources to follow through on the implementation of the Agenda
and establish links between the SDGs and our national priorities.
We are deliberately working to ensure that the SDGs are
implemented in an effective and timely manner for socio-economic
transformation and improvement of our people’s livelihoods. To do

so, we have integrated over 76% of the SDGs into the National
Development Plan for the period 2015-2020, as part of Uganda
Vision 2040.
2

From our engagements thus far, it is evident that the biggest
challenge remains inadequate financing to implement the 2030
agenda - a issue that came out clearly in the High-Level Political
Forum held here in New York last June. We in Uganda, are doing
our best to mobilize resources, both domestic a d external, for

implementation of the SDGs. We are committed to leveraging
support into productive areas, including the private sector, which

has the potential of boosting our economy a d thereby contributing
additional internally generated resources for im lementing the
SDGs.

We call upon Development Partners to fulfil their commitments and
extend support in terms of timely and adequate means for its

implementation; prioritise the special needs of the most vulnerable
countries; and strengthen partnerships.

Madam President
Our development and transformation cannot take place without
peace and securit - these are prerequisites for socio-economic

transformation. We should give attention to supporting an
environment that is peaceful, thus enabling us to concentrate on
growth and development.
Today s challenges transcend borders and no country, alone, can
can the weight of the world on its shoulders. We must redouble
our collective efforts to seek common solutions to various pressing

regional and global challenges including conflicts in various parts of
the world; transnational organised crime, terrorism and violent
extremism.

3

We must be unwavering in our resolve to combat terrorism.

Religious extremism and terrorism from groups like Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram, ISIS and A1 Qaida constitute threats to our common
security and development. This threat is compounded today given

the possibility of the linkage between terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. These are challenges that cut
across national boundaries and require collective responses.

Madam President
Uganda remains committed to multilateralism as a means to

achieving comprehensive and equitable solutions to global problems
and challenges. In order to respond successfully to global crises,
threats and challenges, the international community needs an

efficient multilateral system. It is for this reason that Uganda has
continued to advance the cause for a revitalized, reformed and

effective United Nations system. This is critical to make the UN
more responsive, efficient and effective in its support to the member
states efforts to achieve the sustainable development goals.

Uganda supports the comprehensive reform of the UN Security
Council and our approach is consistent with the continent’s
common position, as enunciated in the Ezulwini Consensus. First,

African issues dominate the Security Council agenda and therefore
the vast majority of decisions made by the Council affect African
countries. Second, over the last few years, Africa has shown its
commitment to conflict prevention, mediation and resolution as

demonstrated by its leadership and response to conflict situations
on the continent.

We believe that for a continent with 54 countries, a population of
over one billion people and demonstrable political commitment, the
continent should have a bigger voice in the global political debate
which will increase the legitimacy of the decisions of the Council
and foster its effectiveness. It is essential that the Security
4

Council s membership, in the permanent and non-permanent
category, is equitable and reflects today’s geopolitical realities. We
therefore, support efforts of Members States to move the
intergovernmental negotiations process forward, and call for a
constr cti e s irit in order to realize the long-awaited reform.

Madam President
Strengthening South-South cooperation is critical for the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. In the forty
years of its existence, South-South Cooperation has prove to be a

valuable avenue for building capacit and promoting development
in developing countries. It has also facilitated cooperation
manifested in the South-South and triangular cooperation. It is our
desire that we expand the scope of South-South cooperation to
include; among others; trade, investment, infrastructure, tourism,
peacebuilding and other areas of mutual interest.

We look forward to the forthcoming United Nations Ministerial
Conference on South-South Cooperation in Buenos Aires, which we

hope will dedicate time to consider how to strengthen and further
revitalize this cooperation, within the context of a Global
Partnership for Sustainable Development.

Madam President
The UN has the primary responsibility for international peace and
security. However, in undertaking this role it is essential that it
supports initiatives undertaken by regional and sub-regional
organizations. This partnership should be based on division of
labour and burden sharing, complementarity, and mutual respect.
In Africa, the evidence is that where this cooperation has happened,
the results have been positive. One example is the cooperation

between the UN and the AU on the situation in Somalia, where
AMISOM has supported the efforts of the government to stabilize
5

that country. Uganda has played an active role in these regional

initiatives. Since AMISOM s deployment 11 years ago, we have
witnessed tremendous progress in Somalia.
• The Somali Government previously based out of the country

has been based in Mogadishu since 2007;
• International Organizations including the United Nations and
Diplomatic Missions have also relocated to Mogadishu;
• More than 80% of Al-Shabaab dominated areas have been

liberated;
• The threat of piracy at sea that threatened international
shipping and trade has been neutralized;
• Business is thriving and there are many reconstruction

activities in many parts of the country and
• Regular elections have been held.

These positive developments and Somalia s relative stability would
hardly have been possible without the contribution and sacrifice of
AMISOM and the Somali Security Forces. Uganda appreciates the
support that the African Union and international partners have
given to AMISOM.
AMISOM was never intended to be in Somalia forever. That is why
it is essential that Somalia is supported to provide security for its
people. It is crucial that any reduction in the troops of AMISOM
corresponds with the strengthening of the Somali Security Forces.
The failure to carefully manage this process could imperil the
political and security gains already made.
On South Sudan, Uganda has actively participated in the IGAD-led
peace process launched in June 2017, and we welcome the recently

signed revitalised Agreement on Resolution of Conflict in South

Sudan (ARCSS).

6

The agreement outlines guidelines on power sharing and
governance, security arrangements, including settling bo ndary

disputes which will be guided by a Boundary Commission. We call
on the international community to support the implementation of
the Agreement.

Madam President
Climate change remains a major challenge and a threat to our
efforts to achieve sustainable development. Uganda supported
efforts to reach a new, universally-binding climate change
agreement reached in Paris, in December 2015. Uganda was one of
the first countries to sign and ratify the agreement last year. We

must continue to muster the necessary political will to fully
implement the agreement. There is a need for the enhanced
delivery of finance to the most vulnerable countries to support their
climate change mitigation and adaption measures.

As highlighted in Agenda 2030, we can be the first generation
to succeed in ending poverty; just as we may be the last to
have a chance of saving the pla et
Let all of us commit to preventing wars and promoting peace.
Let us build new international relations.
Let us reduce inequalities.

Let us ensure that no one is left behind and
Let us uphold the primary role of the United Nations as the
principal Organisation for addressing global challenges.
Madam President
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda coincided with the onset of what
would become Uganda s single largest refugee influx in our history.
As a country, we now hosts 1.4 million the largest refugees on the

African continent and ranking high in the world.

7

The presence of large numbers of refugees mostly arriving

unexpectedly and quickly amplifies the existing vulnerability of
host communities. It also places huge demands on alreadystretched national capacities and resources.

Uganda remains committed to maintaining and promoting asylum
space and its refugee model consistent with the New York
Declaration. We do this because we know that no one chooses to
be a refugee and also understa d the critical importance of treating
refugees humanely, decently a d with dignity. We also remain

committed to working with national, regional and international
actors, in addressing the drivers of displacement and refugees.

We are grateful for the solidarity and support the international
community has extended to Uganda thus far. It is our expectation

that that the new Global Compact on Refugees will provide the
much needed predictable and equitable burden and responsibilit
sharing, among all Member States.

Finally, Uganda remains ready to work with the UN Secretary
General and all the Member States to realise a United Nations that
is more inclusive, effective and responsive to the needs of the
peoples of the world.

I Thank You

8

