STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY AMBASSADOR DR. AUGUSTINE MAHIGA

(MP), MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND EAST AFRICAN COOPERATION
OF THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, AT THE GENERAL DEBATE OF

HE SEVENTY THIRD SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, NEW YORK, 27 SEPTEMBER 2018

Your Excellency, Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa Garces, President of the
General Assembl ;
Your Excellency Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations;
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government;

Distinguished Delegates;

Salutations
I wish to congratulate you madam President for your well-deserved election to
preside over the work of this 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly.

Your election to this prestigious position as the fourth woman to this post in the
history of this organisation and the first from Latin America is not only a unique
accolade to you but also a testimony bestowed on you by the Member States of the
Organisation. In this regard, Tanzania pledges its full support to you and your
entire Bureau.

I also wish to pay special tribute to your predecessor, H.E. Miroslav Lajcak, for his
successful leadership and commitment to the General Assembly during his
Presidency. We wish him well in his future endeavours.
In the same manner, I commend Mr. Antonio Gutteres, UN Secretary General for
his tireless efforts in steering the work of our Organization, especially in
implementing the challenging reforms that are underway under his stewardship.

1

Ferry accident in Tanzania

Madam President;
I am greatly hono red to address this Assembly on behalf of my President H.E.

Dr. John Pombe Joseph Magufuli who could not join his colleagues in this
Assembly following the tragic ferry accident which claimed the lives of more than
200 Tanzanian and left many others wounded. We appreciate the support of the

international communit during this difficult moment. May the souls of the
departed rest in eternal peace.

Condolences

Madam President;
Before I proceed, let me express Tanzania s condolences from my Government to

the United Nations Communit and the entire world for the demise of Dr. Kofi
Annan, an outstanding humanitarian and a defender and advocate of
multilateralism. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family, relatives and
friends. May his soul rest in eternal peace, Amen.

Theme: Making the United Nations relevant to all people: global leadership
and shared responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societie

Madam President;
This year theme Making the United Nations Relevant to All People: Global
Leadership and Shared Responsibilities for Peaceful, Equitable and Sustainable
Societies is very captivating and timely in reinforcing global governance to
enhance the implementation of Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development. This
impetus from the United Nations comes, as it does, as multilateralism is eroding
and needs to be rescued with collective and determined efforts.
Today, we are living in a world where most societies are neither peaceful,

equitable nor sustainable. The world is still facing many violent conflicts and
wars resulting in massive loss of lives, the threat of terrorism, destruction of the
environment, refugee influ es, displaced persons, and global migration, hunger
and poverty persists in many parts of the world. Addressing these challenges
requires a collective visionary leadership and governance.

2

Unfortunately, all these miseries are mainly man-made and can be prevented if
we resolve to take collective measures. Thus, continued and meaningful
cooperation among member states is a prerequisite in addressing all challenges
confronting the world. Through this platform, we can accentuate the relevance
of this body to all nations and the people. Furthermore, we can shape global
policies and norms to respond to different needs of diverse cultures and
societies. Thus, a call for the United Nations to be relevant to all people is
timely; and indeed, it is in accordance with United Nations purposes and
principles as enshrined in the Charter.

Multilateralism
Madam President;
It is in facing these global challenges that multilateralism at all levels of response
and especially through the United Nations and its institutions becomes essential
to ensure peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies. It is undeniable fact that
every sovereign state in the international system seeks to maximize its national
interests and the wellbeing of its citizens. However, acting alone and in isolation

minimizes the potential for realizing desired optimal results for nations acting in
isolation. Globalization and the intricate web relations that have subsequently
emerged globally renders a multilateral approach to issues of national, regional
and international concern are essential and unavoidable.
Unfortunately, the world is, in recent times witnessing multilateral institutions
and principles being put to test. For example, the World Trade Organisation

(WTO), which has been the pillar and yardstick of rule based fair global trading
system is being undermined. Climate change and global warming which is already
wrecking havoc to lives and propert in all regions regardless of national borders
can only be addressed effectively through multilateral approaches. Above all, it

was the post Second World War multilateral edifice and institutions which have
given us the peace we witness today albeit its shortcomings. We should be seeking
to improve the shortcomings in the multilateral system e have created for
ourselves for a better world rather than walking away from it.

Madam Preside t;
Tanzania is unreser edly committed to the multilateralism in pursuit of its
national interests. It is also through unmitigated multilateralism, that we will be

3

able to address critical global challenges such as terrorism, extremism,
radicalism, climate change, restrictive trade policies, trafficking in persons, drug
abuse, pandemic diseases, absolute poverty, immigration dynamics and weapons
of mass destruction, just to mention a few. We are encouraged by the united

chorus from this General Assembly in the defence of multilateralism and in
defence of the purposes and principles of the United Nations which bind all its
members.

Diplomatic Means to Resolve Conflicts
Madam President;
We have seen diplomatic engagement working successfully to bring adversaries to
a roundtable to address their differences peacefully. Tanzania wishes to
underscore the continuous use of diplomatic means and roundtable dialogue to
address conflicts between and among nations. It is in this regard, as a peaceful
and stable countiy, Tanzania has assisted and witnessed the value of brokering
peace. Tanzania welcomes the recent talks between the US and North Korea on
the Korean Nuclear Deal which paved the way for a recent signing of an agreement

between North Korea and Republic of Korea. We hope this deal and others that
have followed the same pattern will yield the anticipated positive outcomes sooner
than late including the long outstanding humanitarian issues in the Korean
Peninsula. These are some of good examples of successful outcomes following the
diplomatic engagements around the world.

All these efforts have confirmed the value of dialogue in resolving and preventing
conflicts.

UN Reforms
Madam President;
Reforms are necessary for continuity and change. For the past few decades, this
very Assembly has continuously been discussing reforms of the United Nations

and its institutions to effectively respond to the current global economic, political,
social and security dynamics. This is the way to make our Organisation alive and
relevant. Currently, the reforms are focusing on the United Nations development
system, management and peace and securit . My delegation strongly believes that

the reforms will be objective and balanced.

4

Tanzania supports the reforms of the United Nations, especially the Security
Council and reiterates the position of Africa as contained in the Ezulwini
Consensus and Sirte Declaration of which we abide with. In addition, Tanzania
urges the international communit to make the process transparent, inclusive and
democratic. All countries, poor and rich must have equal participation and their
voices and positions must be heard and taken seriously. After many years of
almost stalemated negotiations on the Security Council Reforms, it is necessary to
move the process forward but in a manner that will preserve the interests and
positions of all parties concerned in a transparent consultative manner.

Madam President;
We ought to remind ourselves that the credibility of the United Nations rests on a
well-represented and responsive Security Council. The Council is what it is today,
and the reforms are not advancing well because of the eto. If we are to make
meaningful reforms, we should first of all and foremost be bold enough to decide
on the future use of the veto. In this respect, my delegation wishes to stress that
issues relating to the veto, exp nsion of membership and categories should be
addressed as a package and not in isolation.

Addressing Poverty
Madam President;
Over the years and with support of the international community and development
partners, Tanzania has successfully implemented various national development

plans which have significantly contributed to the reduction of poverty.
Furthermore, we are proud to have incorporated the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) into our national development agenda in order to accelerate
economic growth and eradicate poverty.

Drawing experiences from MDGs, it is apparent that implementation of the SDGs
requires adequate, sustainable and predictable funding especially to least
developed countries. Thus, mobilisation of long-term innovative public and private
finance is key to the realisation of the goals.
Tanzania has embarked on systematic legal and administrative reforms which
have been constraining resource mobilization and accountability. The Government

has embarked on relentless fight against corruption and public service
incompetence in order to increase accountability and transparency. The

5

Government has undertaken stringent measures to fight drug and human
trafficking, illicit trade in ivory and violent extremism. As expected, these
measures have generated determined resistance from vested economic and
criminal elements. This has necessitated the Government to take appropriate
countermeasures which have sometimes been misunderstood as restrictive.
Tanzania will continue to respect its constitution, the rule of Law and enshrined
freedom.

Despite the ongoing efforts on domestic resource mobilization, developing
countries continue to experience a global systemic issue on tax regime and illicit

financial flows which contributes to capital flight and deny these countries of their
rightful income. We call upon the international community to double the efforts in
dealing with these systemic issues through, among other things, establishing an
intergovernmental ta body under the United Nations to address tax competition
and tax avoidance. This will in turn put at disposal more resources to developing
countries to implement the SDGs.

Peace Keeping Operations
Madam. President;

Tanzania is among the top troop contributing countries to the UN peacekeeping
missions, and that we have contributed to the restoration of global peace and
stabilit . The number of our troops serving in different missions currentl stands
at 2,687 peacekeepers.
Despite these achievements, the participation of Tanzania in peacekeeping
operations has met some challenges including attacks and killings of our peace

keepers. The December 2017 attack is the worst in the last 25 years of
peacekeeping history. We thank the UNSG and all member states that extended
condolences to Tanzania and the families, friends and relatives of the demised.

Our pain was relieved by many of you who stood with Tanzania during that
difficult moment. May the souls of the departed rest in eternal peace. Amen!
In view of support received from the United Nations, we commend the Secretar

General for promptly forming a Special Investigation Team which established the
causes of the attack and actions to be taken to prevent such hostile and cowardly
incidences in the future. We are also gratified that the recommendations of the

investigation report will feature in the Declaration of Shared Commitments on UN
Peacekeeping Operations which Tanzania supports. Tanzania looks forward to the
implementation of the recommendations.

6

Situation of Refugees
Madam President;
I wish to remind this august assembly of the historical role played by Tanzania in
hosting and providing sanctuary to refugees for decades from Central and
Southern Africa. We have done that out of humanity and in line with the
internationally agreed principles of admitting asylum seekers and protecting
refugees. Currently, we are hosting more than 330,000 refugees, mainly from
Burundi and DRC. O er the years, and decades of hosting refugees, Tanzania has
provided local integration as a durable solution to many refugees than any other
country in the world in excess of 150,000 refugees.
Apart from providing sanctuar to refugees, we have also been involved in

resol ing regional conflicts in the great lakes region that have the potential to
increase refugee influ es. In addition, Tanzania has also assisted the voluntary
repatriation of more than 46,000 Burundian refugees as as of September 2018.
The repatriation exercise was conducted transparently and inclusively in

collaboration with the Burundian authorities, UNHCR and other relevant
development partners. Some misguided Burundi exiles have criticised the exercise
as involuntar when actually there has been bottlenecks and constraints in
implementing the Tripartite Agreement due to lack of resources and mixed
progress in the political and security situation in Burundi.
It is in this regard, Tanzania requests the international community to facilitate
and support the on-going voluntary repatriation of the remaining Burundian
refugees. It is equally important to present a realistic assessment of the evolving

political and security situation in Burundi to permit the refugees to make
informed and objective decision on return to various parts of the country.

Political Situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo
Madam President;
The people of DRC continue to face challenges of peace, securit and stabilit . The
country has continuously been destabilized by warring factions and war lords that

have created havoc leading to political instability in some parts of the country.
This situation has not only denied DRC the opportunity to develop its country and
people, but has also undermined and threatened regional peace and security.
However, the current developments in resolving that impasse is very refreshing
taking into account the government s commitment to hold the long-awaited

7

general elections later this year. The stability in DRC does not only contribute to
address the refugee problem, but also accelerates regional trade, investment, and
economic prosperity opportunities.
In this regard, Tanzania encourages the international community to e tend both

logistical and financial support to DRC so that it can successfully complete the
necessary preparations for, and holding of, the elections. To this end, it is

necessary to continue with the UN stabilization mission under MONUSCO and FIB
in the eastern part of the country until elections are concluded.

US Embargoes on Cuba
Madam President;
In 2015, many world leaders who gathered here welcomed the historic and
momentous decision taken by the United States of America and the Republic of
Cuba to restore diplomatic relations. To most of us, it was the beginning of a
harmonious co-existence with high hopes and expectations. However, with time,
we feel that minimum efforts have been made to meet such hopes and

e pectations by ultimately lifting the embargoes which have condemned the
people of Cuba for many years. We hope that, through the power of reason and

the er diplomatic means that led to the reestablishment of their ties, there will
be the total removal of those embargoes against Cuba, and that a new dawn of
cooperation will follow.
Non-Self-Governing Territories
Western Sahara

Madam President;
The issue of self-determination for Western Sahara has entered a new direction
with Morocco re-joining the African Union, where it is a member of the Peace and

Security Council. There is a renewed opportunit for the United Nations and the
UN Special Envoy of the Secretar -General to work with the newly established AU
Troika Mechanism of the African Union to address the issue of Western Sahara.
Tanzania supports that initiative.

8

The Question of Palestine
Madam President;
Tanzania reiterates its position in resolving the conflict between Israel and
Palestine by supporting the two-state solution. We understand that Palestine has
the right to enjoy its independence and peace as is Israel in accordance with the

United Nations Charter. It is our belief that it is within the creative and
resourceful ability of Israel and the determination of the Palestinian people to
reach a peaceful solution that will permit Israel and Palestine to co-exist in peace
and security.
Conclusion

Madam President;
As I conclude, I reiterate Tanzania s commitment to the principles and purposes of
the United Nations and to multilateralism. Tanzania stands ready all the time to
participate constructively in the search for peaceful solutions to conflicts and
contributing to the UN mandates for conflict prevention and peacekeeping. Above
all, we look to this Organization to continue championing the implementation for
the sustainable development goals to support Tanzania’s own efforts to achieve
sustainable development goals as it heads to a middle income status through
indu strialization.

May God bless us all; and God bless the United Nations
1 thank you for our kind attention.

9

