REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
Permanent Mission of Zambia to the United Nations, 237 East 52nd Street, New York, NY 10022

Tex: (212) 888-5770

Fax: (212) 888-5213

E-mail: zambia@un.lnt

Vlease check against delivery

STATEMENT BY

HIS EXCELLENCY MR. EDGAR CHAGWA LUNGU
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA
AT THE

PLENARY OF THE GENERAL DEBATE
OF THE SEVENTY-THIRD SESSION

OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 25"^ September, 2018
NEW YORK

•

YOUR EXCELLENCY MS. MARIA FERNANDA ESPINOSA GARCES,
PRESIDENT

OF

THE

73^^

SESSION

OF

THE

UNITED

NATIONS

GENERAL ASSEMBLY,

•

THE

UNITED

NATIONS

SECRETARY-GENERAL,

MR.

ANTONIO

GUTERRES,
•

EXCELLENCIES,

•

DISTIGUISHED LADIES AND GENTLEMEN

Let me join other world leaders in congratulating you on your election as
President of the 73"^^ session of the United Nations General Assembly. Zambia
is delighted that after a decade, (2007 to 2018), a woman has yet again taken
up this important seat at the helm of global governance as the fourth woman
President of the General Assembly since the establishment of this world body.

As the United Nations (UN) celebrates its 73rd anniversary next month, its
relevance to the people it serves should continue to be magnified in the
promotion of international peace, cooperation and the development of
sustainable societies free of hunger, poverty and disease. In striving to make
the United Nations relevant to all, we should endeavour to explore new ideas
and best practices to meet expectations of our people, amidst a renewed
necessity for effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability in the utilisation of
limited global resources.

In pursuit of this year's theme, and focusing on the Priorities of the General
Assembly as outlined by your office, we are confident that you will also bring to
the fore, a fresh dimension, as we jointly seek solutions to global economic,
social and political challenges. Zambia stands ready to fully support you
madam President as you diligently discharge the responsibility of this
Assembly.

Madam President,

I am coming from a Continent that should be standing tall and moving towards
rapid human security, economic transformation and infrastructure
development. Indeed a lot should have changed in Africa since the formation of
the United Nations 73 years ago. Yet until recently, Africa's economic structure
has changed veiy little, a concern which has been voiced at both continental

and global fora. The effective implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the
African Agenda 2063 therefore, present huge opportunities for Africa to
revitalise its growth and further accelerate its transformation, as both
frameworks seek to achieve inclusive growth, sustainable development, peace
and security for the continent.

The development path of Zambia guided by its "Vision 2030", through the
implementation of the Seventh National Development Plan, is intended to make
the nation a prosperous middle-income one by 2030. To achieve this, however,
we must overcome many hurdles. Our economy, as with many other developing
economies, largely depends on primary commodities for its economic grcwth
and has not been spared by the negative impacts of declining commodity prices
on the international market.

My Government is, nevertheless, committed and determined to overcome this
challenge by creating a diversified and resilient economy driven, among others,
by agriculture, tourism and the energy sectors and supported with a robust
infrastructure development and conducive policy frameworks. My Government
also recognises that to deliver inclusive and equitable development to the
citizens, we need strengthened mutually beneficial partnerships in the context
of South-South Cooperation and with our development partners. Regional and
development cooperation therefore, remain crucial to unlocking diversified
growth.

Madam President

Zambia is dedicated to the implementation of the Africa Union Agenda 2063,
the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and the
Sustainable Development Goals, including on climate change and the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda on financing for development. That is why my
government has mainstreamed these global development agendas in its 7^
National Development Plan.

My government has consequently, been making progress in infrastructure
development as a key enabler and for better capitalisation of the broad-based
recovery and improved outlook of the economy. Infrastructure development in
road construction and rehabilitation, expansion and construction of hydropower stations, as well as, diversification of energy to renewable energy such
as solar, the rehabilitation of railway lines, construction and modernization of

airports, have been some of the key programmes my government has recently
undertaken.

We are further implementing several policy and structural reforms under the
Economic Stabilisation and Growth Programme (ESGP), which has included
measures on: improving domestic resource mobilization through modernization
and automation of revenue collection processes, enhancing of tax incentives,
and broadening the tax base of the economy.

Whilst we pursue these goals, we are mindful of the challenges in financing
development, as well as the declining resources and official development
assistance, especially to countries in special situations such as LDCs and
LLDCs. We therefore call upon all partners to work with us, and ensure that
together, we effectively implement the Sustainable Development Goals.
In this regard, let me convey my best wishes for the success of the second UN
High Level Conference on South-South Cooperation to be hosted in Buenos
Aires, Argentina in March 2019. We believe it is an opportunity to register
significant progress for development cooperation, and in solidarity to advance
the cooperation among the countries of the south, and we must all strive to
achieve this goal.
Madam President,

Since 1945, the United Nations and the international community have been

consistently and strongly advocating the need for the preservation and
promotion of peace. A number of recent development frameworks have also put
due attention on the importance of protecting global peace and security. The
United Nations is a family where each nation, each person should feel
protected from conflict, sexual violence, discord and other undesirable
consequences of natural or human activity.

My Government therefore, fully supports Resolution 2378 (2017) which focuses
on peacekeeping reforms, with Member States being the center of gravity
through mediation, ceasefire agreements, monitoring and implementation of all
peace accords. Zambia also commits itself to the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P)
initiative of the United Nations Secretary General as contained in the
Declaration of Shared Commitments for United Nations Peacekeeping.

I am glad to further state that, my Government has in the recent past
increased its participation in UN peacekeeping operations, and stands as one of
the major troop and police contributing countries in redressing conflicts

around the world. Additionally, Zambia has increased the number of Women
participation in peacekeeping operations as an added dimension to effective
protection of women and children in conflict zones. We also join other Member
States in saluting the gallant men and women in blue helmets for the sacrifices
they are making.

In further contribution to the peace agenda, Zambia recently took up the
Chairmanship of the Organ on Politics, Defence and Security of the Southern
African Development Community up to August 2019. We are grateful to the
regional leadership for entrusting us with this important responsibility. I can
only assure you that we will discharge this duty with utmost dedication. To our
friends and partners around the world, I call upon you to work with us as we
continue to steer the SADC security architecture, keeping in mind our overall
responsibilities to each of the almost 300 million people of the region.
My
Government is keen to learn and exchange ideas on how we can achieve the
best results.

My Government will in this regard, continue to support all United Nations
peacekeeping mandates that bring to the fore the highest standards of UN
commitment towards conflict prevention, management and resolution.
Madam President,

On gender equality and women's economic empowerment, I wish to reaffirm the
commitment of my Government to eliminating all forms of violence and
discrimination against women and girls. A conducive policy and legislative
environment is further strengthened through the review and enactment of new
legislation and policies that are gender responsive.
Consequently, the implementation of 50-50 Enrolment Policy is making head
ways as schools are now compelled by law to enrol an equal number of girls
and boys. Since last year, 2017, my Government commenced the distribution
of free sanitary towels to girls in rural and per-urban areas in an effort to retain
then in school. This is out of the realisation that the lack of proper sanitary
towels, limits girls' access to education. I further wish to mention that the
continuous implementation of the re-entry policy for pregnant girls is a
success, as a number of girl children have been retained in school after giving
birth, a measure we believe is critical in promoting equal opportunities for
Girls.

I am pleased to inform you that our traditional rulers in all parts of the country
including in the remotest areas, have come out in full force in fighting child

early and forced marriages. We believe that these and many other efforts will
lay a strong foundation for the attadnment of sustainable development goals
and in particular goal number five (5), on gender equality and women's
economic empowerment.
Madam President,

The world has continued to witness imprecedented large movements of
refugees and migrants, resulting in political, social-economic and human rights
ramifications in a number of countries. Large movements of refugees and
migrants are too vast for one country to handle alone. Thousands of refugees
and migrants continue to die every day while looking for safety and dignity in
other countries. We stress the importance of collaborative efforts of the global
commimity in order to ensure safe, orderly and regular migration involving full
respect for human rights and the humane treatment of migrants and refugees.

We believe that if well managed, migration has the potential to contribute to
the social-development of our countries, both countries of origin and
destination. We, therefore, welcome the convening of the Conference on
International Migration this December, and look forward to the adoption of the
Global Compact on Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, the first of its kind.

My Government is confident that the Compact on Migration provides us the
opportunity to improve the global governance of migration, as well as
strengthen the contribution of migrants to sustainable development.
Madam President

I take this opportunity to underline the centrality of the principle of
responsibility sharing for hosting and supporting the world's refugees, taking
into account the differing national capacities and resources among Member
States.

As

one

of the

countries

selected

for

the

application of the

Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework, Zambia looks forward to the
adoption of the Compact on Refugees which has among others, highlighted the
specific actions needed to ease pressure on refugee hosting countries and
communities.

Let me reaffirm my Government's commitment to its international obligations,
under the 1951 Convention and its 1967 Protocol relating to the status of

refugees. Under these instruments, Zambia takes its responsibility to offer
protection to those who seek asylum seriously and will continue to play a

meaningful role in assisting people affected by conflict situations, human rights
violations and other threats to their wellbeing.
Madam President

I wish to recognize the decision by the Secretaiy-General and his team for the
progress made in undertaking the mandate on the reform of the United Nations
Development System, Management and the Peace and Security Pillar.
It is with deep concern, however, that little or no progress has been made on
reform of the Security Council. It will be recalled that in 2000, during the
Millennium Summit, World Leaders called for early conclusion to the
negotiations on Security Council reform. In 2005 during the World Summit,
leaders expressed concern at the slow pace of progress and urged negotiations
on Security Council reform to be expedited. Thirteen years later, we are still no
closer to agreement on such a fundamental issue that seeks to make the
United Nations truly representative, democratic and effective.
Next year, 2019, will mark the 40*^ anniversary since the item of reform of the
Security Council was put on the agenda of the General Assembly. You, Madam
President, have been entrusted by world leaders to lead the process of
reforming the Security Council. We hope that you can report substantive
progress by the time we mark the 40^ anniversary milestone.

I wish, in this regard, to reiterate that Africa remains steadfast and united in
its call for two permanent members in the Security Council with all the
privileges and obligations that come with that status, and five non-permanent
seats. Not only is this a matter of common decency and correction of a
historical injustice, but it is also a matter of restoring the dignity of Africa,
which currently remains the only continent that does not have representation
in the permanent category of the Security Council. It is in this vein that we
also support the call for a non-permanent seat for Small Island Developing
Countries whose challenges are so unique that it is imperative that their
perspective be incorporated as a new dimension to the UN's approach to
international peace and security.
I thank you for your attention.

