STAT MENT BY

HIS EXCELLENCY EMMERSON DAMBUDZO
MNANGAGWA,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZIMBABWE,
AT THE
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 73rd SESSION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
NEW YORK, USA:

26 SEPTEMBER 2018

1

Your E cellency, Ms Maria Fernanda Espinosa
Garces, President of the 73rd Session of the General
Assembly,
Your Majesties,
Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellency, Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary

General of the United Nations,
Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is my honour and pleasure to deliver my maiden
statement in this august Assembly. Allow me to
congratulate you. Madam President, on your election to

preside over this 73rd Session of the United Nations
General Assembly. As only the fourth woman to hold this
important position in the history of the United Nations;
your election is indeed most appropriate in ter s of
addressing gender equality in our organization.

The theme which you have chosen, Making the UN
relevant to all people: Global leadership and shared
responsibilities for peaceful, equitable and sustainable
societies resonates well with the mantra of Agenda 2030
namely to leave no one behind. The theme is a timely
reminder for us to keep the momentum going three years
after the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals.

Madam President,

Also at the heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is a promise to end all forms of poverty.
This shared vision and common destiny requires us to put
all our hands on deck in order to meet the ambitious
targets and create a better world. For us, in the

developing world, the eradication of poverty is at the top
of our agenda priorities.

Development must equally be placed at the centre of the
work of the United Nations, as it plays an important role

in preventing hunger, deprivation, food insecurity, disease

and ultimately conflict. The inclusion of the interests and
views of women, the youth, children and vulnerable
members of our societies should be integral and essential
components in all our programmes.

Madam President, Distinguished Guests,
I am pleased to report that Zimbabwe has made
substantial progress in the implementation of some of the

Sustainable Development Goals, in particular with
regards to ensuring food security. Through our people
centered policies and planned programmes,
complemented by private sector financing and
investments; farmers receive inputs, equipment and
technical support.
In a bid to improve nutrition and broaden income
opportunities, we have also extended support to grow the
livestock, fisheries and wildlife sectors. We are confident

that these multi-pronged programmes will accelerate
Zimbabwe s re-entry into the global economy and
associated value chains.

This is one example of innovation, creativity and home

grown solutions in addressing key developmental and
economic challenges in spite of the continued illegal
sanctions imposed on our country. We call for their
immediate and unconditional removal. Meanwhile, we
look forward to the first overall review of implementation

of the SDGs to be held under the auspices of the General
Assembly in 2019.

Madam President,
Peace, security, stability, democracy and good
governance are essential ingredients for sustainable
development. In view of the fact that elections as an
integral element of democracy, my country held the much

anticipated Harmonised General Elections on the 30th July

2018. Following my deliberate and conscious decision to
open up the democratic space and emphatic call for peace,
unity and tolerance of divergent views amongst our
people; political contestations, election campaigning,
voting and counting processes were conducted freely,
peacefully and transparently.
In the spirit of transparency and openness, a broader
spectrum of international observers and global media
houses were accredited to observe our elections. The

exceptionally peaceful pre and post electoral environment
represented the maturing and entrenchment of democracy
in Zimbabwe.

We are grateful to the UN and other Member States for
sending Election Observer Missions and for the Technical
Assistance received by our Election Management Body.
The recommendations will be taken into account as we
deepen our democratic and electoral processes.

We shall continue to entrench constitutionalism,
democratic traditions and norms, peace unity and

harmony; for it is indeed under such conditions that
sustainable development, inclusive economic growth and
prosperity can occur.

The isolated and unfortunate incident of the post election
violence that occurred on 1 August 2018 is regrettable
and most unacceptable. The Commission of Inquiry
comprising eminent persons of national, regional and
international repute has now begun its work in earnest.
Their ultimate report and recommendations shall help us
bring closure to the matter and assist in the improvement
of our institutional governance.

Madam Preside t, Distinguished Guests,
Now that the elections are behind us, my country is now
focusing on economic development as we seek to leapfrog
the mordenisation and industrialization of our country.

The Land Reform Programme is behind us and is
irreversible.

Emboldened by the dreams, hopes and aspirations of our
people, and in tandem with the United Nations Agenda
2030 and the African Union Agenda 2063, we have
outlined our vision to become a middle income economy

with a per capita income of about USD3 500. This will
bring on board increased investment, decent jobs, broad
based empowerment and a society free from poverty and

corruption by 2030.
Zimbabwe is open for business and we are presently

undertaking a raft of economic and political reforms to
ensure an environment that facilitates inclusive and
sustained economic growth. We have put in place

institutions and instruments that maximize land utilization
and increase agriculture productivity.

8

Equally, strategies are in place in the various sectors of
our economy, to enable my country to enter the global
value chains.

The development and modernization of our roads,
railways, airports, energy and ICT infrastructure is being
accelerated in line with our regional and continental quest
for enhanced connectivity and integrated infrastructure.

Madam Preside t,

Zimbabwe looks forward to playing a positive and
constructive role as a free, democratic, transparent,

prosperous and responsible member of the family of
nations. We are committed to strengthen dialogue,
cooperation and partnerships, underpinned by mutual
respect, common values and shared principles.

The prevention of conflict must be a frontline strategy.
My country remains committed to strengthening
multilateralism and peaceful resolution of differences. In

this regard, we should address the root causes of conflict

which includes poverty, inequality, deprivation, disputes
over land and resources, as well as struggles for self
determination.

Peacemaking and peacekeeping must be complimented by
peace building efforts to prevent recurrence and relapse
into conflict. Zimbabwe continues to make its modest

contributions through the deployment of its personnel to
various United Nations peacekeeping and peace building
missions.

Madam President, Excelle cies, Distin uished Guests,

The United Nations and its organs require to be
democratized. We join the call for Africa to be
represented in the permanent category and to have
increased representation in the non-permanent category.

This position is indeed justified, in view of the need to
correct the historical injustice which has left the African
10

continent on the periphery of all major global decision
making processes.

We emphatically call for the review and reform of the
Bretton Woods institutions and other International
Financial Institutions.

Trade is an engine for development if conducted fairly
and in accordance with agreed rules. We therefore call

for negotiations under the World Trade Organisation
which foster inclusive and shared economic growth; and
further advances the global development agenda.

Madam President,

In the spirit of leaving no one behind, our efforts to
promote global partnership for peace and development
would never be complete unless we address the plight of
people living under occupation. It is most saddening that
some of us continue to turn a blind eye to the suffering of
the people of Palestine.
11

It is high time the Security Co ncil fulfilled its Charter
obligations and duties by implementing all its
Resolutions; including Resolution 181, 242, 338 and
2334.
On the African continent, it is equally disheartening that
the people of Western Sahara are yet to exercise their

inalienable right to self determination. We call on the
Security Council to insist on the holding of an
independent referendum for the Sahrawi people without
delay, in compliance to the relevant decisions of the

African Union and the resolutions of the United Nations.
Furthermore, it is imperative and urgent for the Council to

work tirelessly to strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union Peace and Security Council in the search
for a just and fair solution to the issue of Western Sahara.

12

Madam President,

Climate change presents a threat to all of humanity and its
impact respects no borders. We therefore call for
collective action and responsibility on the matter. As a
developing country, we seek support in the areas of
adaptation, mitigation, technology, finance and capacity
building as envisaged in the Paris Agreement.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Zimbabwe s

commitment to the principles of the United Nations
Charter and pledge to continue to work with other nations

in promoting and strengthening multilateralism for the
good of humanity.
Now more than ever before, the United Nations must
stamp its authority and work harder for peace in a world

where might is increasingly being regarded as right. Let
us work together in harmony to ensure that the United
Nations and all its organs, truly serve the collective
interests of all Member States.
13

As global leaders, we have a shared and onerous
obligation to transform our societies and create a more
peaceful and inclusive world, for present and future
generations.

I thank you!

14

