-] ...... austria pÿrmaÿ4hnt missioÿj of ausÿrÿ:,£ to the u 4ÿ ej nations statement by h.e. mr. sebastian kurz federal minister for europe, integratio[ÿ and foreign affairs of austria at the 72nd un general assembly 19 september 20!7 check sgainst delivery mr. president, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, the world has never felt more }nsecure, at least not in my lifetime. four years ago, when [ first spoke from this podium, i was concerned about three serious challenges. 1. violent conflict had returned to europe with the crisis in and around ukraine. 2, with the success of daesh in iraq and syria radicalization and extremism sharply increased within our societies. 3. the potential humanitarian consequences of a nuclear explosion became a growing concern. and today? we still face a violent conflict in and around ukraine. acts of extremism and terrorism continue, and the crisis in north korea demonstrates that the risk of a nuclear confrontation is higher than the world has seen in a long time. ladies and gentlemen, while we have achieved a tot over the past years, there are still too many conflicts around tile world. conflicts that result in terrible human sufferhÿ9, such as in syria, south sudan, ukraine, yemen or libya. and there are also new sources of instability, such as in venezuela or in myanmar. on a global ievef, poverty, hunger and climate change as well as orgapÿzeÿcd me _ancltheÿp[otiferation of we.apons remai n key concerns. and what really worries me is that we seem to have lost trust in the ability of states and institutions to solve these challenges. as current chair of the organization for security and cooperation in europe i can see this on a regular basis. this is a dangerous development because there is no alternative to [nternationai cooperation! ladies and gentlemerÿ, just look at terrorism, terrorist organizations such as daesh work on a global scale, more than 25.,000 persons die each year in terrorist attacks all over the world. and almost all of them are the result of extreme radicalisation. this is why as osce chair the fight against radicalisation is a priority for us. we are working on concrete recommendations for osce states on how to better prevent and stop radical groups from misleading our citizens. what we need to do, is to destroy these radical groups militarily where they operate, such as in ÿyl ra and traq. but we also have to be clear that after our military success more foreign terronst fighters will return to our societies. this is why at the same time we also have to continue this fight within our own societies, we have to take more action to stop radicals with police measures and prevent our youth from being misled. ladies and gentlemen, the migration crisis is another global problem and source of instability. over 60 million people are on tile rnove worldwide. no country can manage this crisis on its own. tf we look at demographics we know that we have to act now, in time next 30 years, world population will grow from 7.5 to about 10 biition people, and africas population alone will double from 1,2 to 2.5 biliion. ........ the lastyears haÿ,ÿ shown how difficult-sudl aÿrrassiveÿdg rag-on movement can become. over 1 million people have come to europe via smugglers. and thousands died in the mediterranean. we need to stop this! dncontrojled migratiori leads to chaos, therefore, we need to manage orderly migration and support people as much aspossibte in their countries of origin. in order to achieve this we should address three key issues: 1. countries need effective control of their borders. without such control, no government can establish security and maintain public support for legal immigration. tile citizens need to have confidence that their gore-nments decide who should cross the border, and not the srnugglers! 2, the business model of traffickers of human beings must be destroyed. securing the borders is the most important first stepÿ smugglers cannot sell their ticket to europe when there is no way to come through. people that are saved shall be brought back to their countries of origin or to internationally monitored migration centers in their region. 3. we need an effective support for countries of origin to establish a local perspective for the young generation there! this is why over the past four years austria decided to double its bilateral development assistance and to increase its emergency fund by four*. i welcome that the united nations is developing a global compact on migration as well as a compact on refugees. they should ensure a more coordinated international approach to deal with these challenges. i -----,- . ..................... ÿ ........... tÿ .......... ladies and gentlemen, cooperation is also key when we address crises and conflicts around the globe. the crisis in and around ukraine has lasted already for too long. more than 10.000 people have died. 3.8 million people are in need of humanitarian aid. desp!te the minsk agreements, heavy weapons continue to move into the region, and mines are being laid. despite-negotiaÿns wbtjqÿ:the nor-mandy grÿ)ÿta, iheqoolitÿcal process is stalled. despite regular meetings of the trilateral contact group there is no progress on the ground. the worst thing is that civilians suffer the rnosl the special monitoring mission of the osce is key in stabitising the situation. but its unarmed monitors are increasingly tt]reatened. and for the first time the mission lost one of its members. despite this tragic incident it is important to maintain the mission. from rny visit to tiqe conflict zone i know that without the osces monitoring the situation would become even worse. therefore, in march this year the osce strengthened the mission by increasing the number of monitors up to a thousand and by providing better technical equiprnent. i ais0 welcome the discussions in the security council to increase the security of the osce monitors, possibly with a un peacekeeping operation, more safety for monitors means more monitors on the ground. and more monitors on the ground means more security for the local population. we are also working hard to find political solutions reaching beyond ceasefires. the goal remains clear: a free and stabie ukraine with good relations to both its western and eastern neighbors. : , - ......................... tÿ-r .......................................... mr. president, allow rne to turn to another security threat we must deal with. the risk of a nuclear confrontation today is bigger than it has been in a tong time. the consequences of a nuclear explosion are extremely grave. nuclear disarmament remains the number one unfinished business. and the recent escalation of tensions by the dprk is a clear warning signal. austria has been consistently engaged in efforts to reduce the risk of a nuclear disaster and to work for a world without nuclear weapons. this is a hard and long road. we are not nayve about that. but it is a goal that we should fight for. tn this regard, we welcomed the vienna agreement that placed irans nuclear activities under international observation. undermining this agreement would weaken efforts to achieve negotiated solutions for nuclear disputes. the new treaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons is an important achievement in this regard. it is a crucial step to get rid of all nuclear weapons. today, we often hear that nuclear weapons are necessary for security. this narrative is not only wrong, it is dangerous. the new treaty provides a real alternative: a world without nuclear weapons, where everyone is safer. the overwhelming support of the international community in adopting this treaty, demonstrates that many countries share this goat. mr. president at a time when universal values are u.nder threat, we need to be strong in standing up for human rights, the rule of law and good governance. protecting civilians and human rights has always been a priority of austria's foreign policy. this is why we hope to be elected to the un human rights council for the period 201b-2021 and ]: would like to ask all of you for your support. i can assure you that austria will continue to work for effective international cooperationÿ and we will continue to actively support the united nations and its new secretary general. thank you!