check aqainst delivery statement h.e. mr. jusuf kalla vice president of the republic of indonesia at the general debate of the 72nd session of the united nations general assembly new york, 21 september 2017 indonesia mr. president, allow me to begin by wishing "happy new year" to those who celebrate the new islamic year 1439 hijra... may peace be upon us all. i would also like to extend indonesia's deep sympathies and condolences, to those affected by the recent natural disasters. these include, earthquake in mexico, hurricanes in the caribbean, and parts of the united states, as well as floods in south asia. our prayers go out to all the victims. mr. president, i congratulate you, on your election as president, of the seventy-second general assembly. indonesia is committed, to contribute to your successful presidency. i would also like, to thank his excellency peter thomson, of fiji, for his able stewardship, as the president of the seventy first session. we commend his role in driving a universal push for the sdgs. mr. president, we are all represented in same world map. yet, we see many different worlds. our world today, is far from equitable. -1 indonesia among the peoples of our world, there are wars, hunger, extreme poverty, and illiteracy. common peace and equal prosperity are distance away. indonesia therefore welcomes, the theme of this year's assembly, "focusing on people: striving for peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable planet". the theme recognizes the importance to place, the needs of the people, first. it highlights that peace; prosperity, and sustainability, are mutually reinforcinq. in this context, i wish to underline 3 (three) important points, for achieving "peace and adecent life for aii on a sustainable planet". first, it must be underlined, peace is never given. it has to be developed, and nurtured. we must work, towards creating a global ecosystem of peace and stability. indonesia's experience in asean, shows that building such an ecosystem is fundamental. it is fundamental for economic development. it is fundamental for the prosperity of the people. 2 indonesia indonesia firmly believes, developing a global ecosystem of peace and stability, is doable. however, to succeed, we must practice the habit of dialog, inclusiveness, peaceful settlement of disputes, and non-use of force. more importantly, we must develop the un as a robust global institution, that emphasizes on the maintenance of peace, security and stability. key to this, is ensuring the un reform process results in a strong, effective and relevant united nations .... --) and it was for this reason .... that indonesia co-sponsored the declaration of support for un reform. furthermore, we must also strengthen, the international peacekeeping and peacebuilding mechanisms. indonesia is honored, to have contributed in mediating conflicts, peace keeping and peace building beyond our borders. we have, and will always be ready, to be part of a .qlobal solution. in the last 60 (sixty) years, we have contributed more than 38,000 (thirtyeight thousand) personnel to 28 (twenty-eight) un peacekeeping operations. we currently deploy more than 2,700 (two-thousand seven-hundred) peacekeepers in 9 (nine) peacekeeping missions. and we are determined, to achieving 4,000 (four-thousand) personnel by 2019 (two-thousand nineteen) .... including increasing female peacekeepers. 3 i ndon £s ia beyond peacekeeping, indonesia peacebuilding commission. is an active member of the we underline, that ensuring sustainable peace at global level, requires a global "culture of prevention". it is also important to ensure a strong partnership between the united nations, relevant regional organizations, and national governments. mr. president, a global ecosystem of peace and stability, requires the international community to settle, one of the longest unresolved conflicts. the palestine-israel conflict. this year, marks half a century of the illegal occupation of palestine. we shall not give up. palestine is in the heart of indonesian foreign policy. indonesia will continue to support palestine. after 50 (fifty) years of stalemate, we need a fresh approach. a sustainable and innovative approach that can bring about a two-states solution. mr. president, sustainable peace is not an end in itself. decent life for all people, must be our global goal. this leads me, to my second point. 4 indonesia there must be synergies, between sustaining peace and development agenda. we must cultivate peace and stability, to work for us in achieving sustainable development. the international system is well equipped to attain decent life for all. a number of global commitments have been agreed. the sdgs, the climate change paris agreement to name two. however, commitments must be translated into concrete actions. the key to this, is the means of implementations, for least developed and developing countries. adequate funding, technical assistance and capacity building, as well as transfer of technology are important elements for success. also, it is important to support regions that have huge potentials, and have undertaken great reforms, towards sustainable development. africa, mr. president, is one such region. for indonesia, south-south and triangular cooperation (sstc), is our way to supporting development in least developed and developing countries. in the last three years, we have organized 167 (one-hundred sixty-seven) south-south and triangular cooperation programs. 5 indonesia over two thousand participants from least developed and developing countries have benefited. indonesia is also proud to host the first indonesia - africa forum in april 2018 (two-thousand eighteen). this is our commitment, to strengthening partnership with africa, towards achieving sustainable development. mr. president, synergy between sustaining peace and development agenda requires a society that is just, inclusive and fully respects human rights. there should be, no more man-made humanitarian crisis in this world. indonesia shares the concern of the international community on the developments in rakhine state. we have proposed a 4+1 (four plus one) formula to the government of myanmar, placing the needs and welfare of the people at the center. people-centered development must therefore, be at the heart of national development program. that is why indonesia continues to strengthen democracy and good governance at all level. over the past ten years, through the bali democracy forum, indonesia has also shared experiences and best practices on our democracy. working to strengthen democracy to the wider region. 6 indonesia furthermore, development must also not come at the expense of the environment. despite the skeptics... climate change is real. it is happening as we speak. like many small island developing states, indonesia with over 17,000 (seventeen-thousand) islands, is feeling the changing weather patterns, and rising sea level. it will affect the sustainability of our development - even our survival. indonesia is therefore, fully committed to the paris agreement. we call on all countries, to implement their obligations under the paris agreement. mr. president, one of the greatest challenges to our global order, and development agenda, is the threat of terrorism, radicalism and violent extremism. this threat is real, imminent and ever presence. terrorism undermines peace and disrupts development. thus, my third point, the urgent need for a global action and partnership to combat terrorism, radicalism and violent extremism. key to tackling terrorism is to address the root causes. addressing extreme-poverty, illiteracy, and the massive youth unemployment.. 7 indonesia for indonesia, we have adopted a comprehensive approach to addressing terrorism, radicalism and violent extremism. a seamless combination of using hard and soft powers .... strengthening law enforcement and rule of law .... while at the same time fostering engagement with the communities .... through education, empowerment as well as interfaith and cultural dialog. indonesia also implements, a comprehensive program for de-radicalization and the re-integration, for those that have been radicalized or have gone to dark side. we have de-radicalized over one thousand six hundred extremists, in over 72 (seventy two) prisons in indonesia. in this digital age of social media .... terrorism is like cancer.., it spreads quickly and is deadly .... no one country can address it in isolation. global cooperation and comprehensive approach is the only panacea, to eradicating the threat. mr. president, as global challenges become more complex, it is evident that unilateralism is not a sustainable solution. the world needs strong partnership .... a true global partnership. indonesia has long believed in global partnership... 8 indonesia for this believe stems from, our embedded national slogan "bersatu kita teguh bercerai kita runtuh" . which translates into "united we stand divided we fall" indonesia always desires to always contribute to global partnership .... to global peace and security... . to global prosperity .. ... indonesia has presented its candidacy for non-permanent membership of the security council for the year 2019 (two-thousand nineteen) to 2020 (two-thousand twenty) indonesia..... a true partner for world peace..... we are counting on your support for our candidacy. thank you mr . president. 9 ~ ~-': " '~ indonesia " ". ~l~ · r. ,,:, '.: ~~ :-. .! -,:,.. ~ .~ .