repubmc of san marino statement by h.e. mr. nicola renzt minister of foreign and political affairs with functions of prime minister of the republic of san marino at the gen etlal debate of the 72nd session of the united nations general assembly new york, 22 september 2017 j !. cÿ.{tlst. detivc___ÿr.ÿ mr. president, mr. secretatt-general, excdlencies, ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of tee government of the republic of san marino, i would like to congratulate h.e. mkoslav lajeÿk on his dection as president of the 72nd session of the un general assembly and to wish him a fruitful work. his experimÿce as minister of for.eign affairs of slovakia and los deep kmowledge of hxtemational a£fÿs aÿe valuable resolÿces for the united nations. the san marino delegation will ensure you, me. president, its utmost colÿaborat-km dui:ing all works of the general assembly. at the beginning of his mandate as secretalt-general of the united nations, my countu would also like to offer heartfelt wishes to h.e. ant6nio guterres and thank him for the energy and determination akeady shown at the hehn of the united nations in these first months of activiw,' mr. president, i am grateful for the theme chosen for this session: "focusing on people: str.ivh:g for peace and a decmÿt life for al! on a sustainable planet", where issues so dear to the republic of san marino such as human rights, peace and sustainable development are at the center of the agenda. this is a cross-cutting issue, since human rights are reflected in any action of the united nations aimed at achieving peace, security, justice and sustainable development. the intematkmal comm.uniÿ, must do its utmost to achieve these objectives in the coming years. mr. president, in eveu situation of armed conflict, we are wimessing with dismay a systematic violation of human rights. refugees and migrants are subject to discrhÿaination and to forms of abuse and trafficldng, racial and religious discrimination and intolerance persist in many parts of the worm. inequality and social exclusion are at thebasis of the numerous and increasingly complex challenges that the united nations is called to face. in recent yeaÿs, unfortunately, we have wimessed a growth of inequality and margjimlizatiotl not only in developing counties but also in the richest ones, where increasingly large sections of the population have to snuggle against growing poverty'. this is a threat to global stability, since it lcads to an erosion of confidence in national and multilateral institutions and, in parallel, it contributes to fuelling nationalist and populist movements. collective commitment to human rights is therefore essential. the relationship between peace, security and respect for human rights is undeniable: the measures for the protection and promotion of human tights are essential to prevent conflicts and to support peace. moreover, peace and sustainable development are ÿvo complementary concepts: more inclusive and peaceful societies set the conditions for sustainable development and vice versa. mr. president, the complexiÿ, level of the challenges that the united nations is called to face today is unparalleled in the histou of this organization. the interconnected nature of the challenges reminds us that countries must act together to be more effective in the fight against climate change, global terrorism, poverty and to build more inclusive, safe and just societies for all. as stated by the secretary general in his report on the works of the organization, it is important to bolster confidence in multilateralism and in particular in the united nations. ouÿ counttt has ;dways believed in the power of dialog and respect for others, values which underpin the peaceful coexistence among peoples. its profoundly egalitarian nature, universal participation and unquestioned legitimacy unequivocally reaffirm the value and the central role of flÿe united nations as a forum for solving global problems. the many and varied religious and cul0,,tal traditions present in our organization must not be an obstacle, but rather a valjaable resource to achieve global solutions through a synthesis and mediation of diversities. the umted nations must adapt quicmy to the new globa! challenges, but also to the new opportunities offered by an increasingly interconnected world, in order to be more effective in carlting out its mandate. therefore, reforms are crucial to future world stability and t=aintenance of international peace and security, and must remain at the center of our actions. we reject any downsizing of the role of the united nations due to the impossibility of finding a common agreement on the }eforms needed to improve its functioning. the republic of san marino is following with interest the revitalization process of the un general assembly, which must continue to be a reference point, a forum for the exchange of ideas and for conducting discussions, in which solutions based on a strong consensus may be achieved. shnilarly, the security, council reform should be an objective of all member states. as we have stated on previous occasions, our country believes that intergovernmental negotiations favor the search for an agreement based on a broad and strong political consensus, able to reflect the interests of all negotiating groups. san marino calls for a reform that makes the council more democratic, transparent, efficient and accountable. this goal can be achieved only through a continuous dialogu.e among the states and the awareness that overcoming the respective initial positions is essential to negotiate the broadest agreement possible. the republic of san marino supports the secretad" general's reform agenda, aimed at streamlinhÿg procedures, decentralizing decision-malting processes and achieving greater transparency and account,ability. mr. president, human rights are the raison d'etre of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development and of the 17 sustainable deveiopment goals. the agenda defines our future and the vision of a peaceful, inclusive and safe society, where the burden of poverty has been elhwinated, prosperity is shared and a decent work may be offered to all. it also reflects, together with the paris agreement on climate change, the member states' ambition and commitment to reducing carbon dioxide emissions by 2020, thus giving to our planet and its inhabitants the possibility of living longer and in better condition. the agenda is ambitious because it is universal, integrates the three dimensions of sustainable development (social, economic and environmental) and applies to all states. a year after the adoption of the sustainable development goals, their effective lmplementation is today's real challenge. in many areas covered by the 2030 agenda, unforttmately progress is not in line with expectations. much more needs to be done for the 700 million people living in extr.eme poverty and experiencing malnutrition. more targeted actions should be implemented to reduce maternal mortality and gender inequality', to ensure an inclusive and just education, to invest in sustainable energy and to provide healthcare to wider segments of the population. the implementation of the 2030 agenda is the responsibility of individual states, which should keep faith to their promises by incorporating sustainable devdopment objectives into thek development laws and polities. a culÿttal revolution must accompany our policies in the coming years. in the republic o£ san marhlo, for instance, we have promoted initiatives concerning education for sustainable development in various sectors, such as education, construction, waste disposal and public transport. not only national governments but also the ptivate sector and civil sociew play an important role in mobilizing the resources necessary for the im.plementation of dae agenda. in this regard, san marino recalls the important result achieved with the adoption of the addis ababa action agenda, which identifies various concrete measures to finance devdopment and lays the foundations of the global program of the agenda. mr. president, the 2030 agenda states that' the rights of the most vulnerable people must be promoted and protected, the republic of san marino has always paid special attention to the most vulnerable groups, such as women, children, the elderly and the disabled. san marino, which is among the ftrst signatou count, ies of the convention on the rights of persons with disabilities, intends to fully implement the convention by adoptkag legislative frameworks and policies that favor the inclusion and full participation of people with disabilities in dÿe country's working, social and cultural context. gender equalit?, must be a goal of the international conu-nunity. unh)rmnately, women are still the victims of discrimination and violence in maw parts of the world, also in the most developed countries. in support of the initiatives promoted by the secretary-general, san marino sig-ned the compact to combat and prevent sexual abuse and exploitation in the context of utaited nations peacekeeping missions. we believe that the rights and dignity of the victims of sexual abuse should be placed at the heart of our collective efforts. children are unfortunately the most vulnerable victims of violence, abuse mad exploitation and the protection of their rights must be at the center of out actions. san matino supports the ministerial declaration of this year's high-level political forum, wllich reafftttned the commitment of the international con-mmnity ha favor of children, focusing in particttlar on 4 5 poverty eradication, the promotion o£ their participation and the elimination of all forms of violence and discrimination. mr. president, re:fugees and migrants continue to be the subject of a violent discrimination. the enormous humanitarian challenge posed by large movements of refugees and migrants can be addressed only through greater cooperation and sharing of responsibilities and costs among ah states. this phenomenon has reached an unprecedented dimension in the lÿstory of the united nations. the republic of san marin.o supports the new york declaration for refugees and migrants, adopted last september. it contains a series of bold commitments to address the challenges posed by the large flows of migrants and refugees, but it also intends to develop a plan for their implementation. similarly to the large movements of refugees and reign:ants; the united nations is also called to face deep and complex humanitarian crises. as indicated in the secretary g.ermrai's report on the activity of the organization, in 2017 about 96 million people, more than half of which were women and children, received hmnanitarian assistance in more than 40 countries. the report shoves that in 2016 natural disasters caused the displacement of about 31 million people, three times more than those forced to flee because of armed conflicts. an unprecedented food crisis invones more than 20 million people in the african continent. the republic of san marino has always supported the development cooperation projects and urgent interventions also through numerous international organizations, especially of the un fanÿy. our countt3., is grateful to the un secretary, genera! for the rapid and fundamental action in favor of dÿe populations facing humanitarian emergencies and to ocha and cerf for their rapid response and substantial contribution. mr. president, today, the united nations has recorded the largest deployment of peacekeeping operations (16) and special political missions (36). the recent wars and those still ongoing have caused great sufferi*ÿg to civilians, an unprecedented global hmnanitarian crisis, the tragedy of the great movements of migrants and refugees, as wel! as an increase of terrorism and violent extremism, of populism and intolerance. despite the negotiations for a politica! solution in syria, which were resumed last january under the auspices of the united nations, faciÿtated by the special envoy of the secretaugeneral, to whom the republic of san marino gives its full support, the situation remains highly unceictakl, thus causing a massive displacement of civilians and at the same time posing a threat to the stability o£ the entire region. mr. president, the republic of san marino supports the secretary, general in his initiative ahned at strengthening prevention activities and conflict mediation. in this regard, my country will participate in the italian initiative for the creation of a network of women mediators in the mediterranean area, whose purpose is to contribute to peace processes through prevention and mediation. the umted nations must be able to address in advance the causes of a possible conflict, by establishing relations with the various national or regional stakeholders and working to achieve sustainable peace, more and more frequently, terrorism and violent extremism are generated and fed by armed conflicts and exacerbate ethnic, religious, political and economic tensions. violations of human rights by terrorist groups such as isil, a1-qaeda and boko haram ÿe very serious and include murder, kidnapping, forced conversion, human trafficking, slaveu, sexual abuse, as weu as destruction of places that have a religious or a culturd meaning for ethnic and religions minorities. the self-proclaimed islamic state and its associated forces are also responsible for numerous deadly terrorist attacks in europe, asia and africa. the hÿternarional communit), and the united nations must act so that those responsible for these heinous crimes are prosecuted. san marino supports the activities and initiatives of the united nations in the promotion of justice and the rule of law, which form an integral part of the protection and pmmodon of human rights. my country, welcomes the acdon of the secretary-general, supported by the general assembly of the united nations, for the establishment of an oÿqce of counfer-terroÿism, headed by a deputy secretary-general, in order toenhance coherent action by the united nations and provide better assistance to member states in their fight against terrorism. the disarmament activity plays a cruciai role for peace and international security. the recent tests carried out by the democratic people's republic of korea in the context of a program to build nuclear weapons threaten security not only regionally, but also globalty and stress the need for a robust disarmament and non-prolifeÿcation policy. the republic of san marino took part in the negolÿations that led to the adoption of the tÿeaty on the prohibition of nuclear weapons last july. the treaty is an hÿportant step to achieve the corrunon goal of a world without nuclear weapons. mr. president, to address the many and complex challenges of today, the united nations must be more ef-fective and flexible. member states must assume their responsibilities, including that of making our organization able to fulfill its mandate, which is to protect the citizens of the world. thanks to its century-old histo,y of peace and freedom, san marino is a state with a strong identity. our state is smali, but proud to b i:ing its contribution to the united nations community:, everythhxg we do should ahn at restoring the capacity and authoritativeness of the united nations, so that it can continue to be the indispensable reference point of the klternatj.onal cotnmunity. thank you.