CAMEROON

'^^'?AVAIL-P^

72"" SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY (New York, 12 September - 22 December 2017)
General Debate
Theme: Focusing on People: Striving for
Peace and a Decent Life for All on a
Sustainable Planet
*'1^
STATEMENT BY H-E- PAUL BIYA,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON

New York, 22 September 2017 Check against delivery

MISSION PERMANENTE DU CAMEROUN AUPRES DES NATIONS UNIES

PERMANENT MISSION OF CAMEROON TO THE UNITED NATIONS

22 EAST 73rd STREET NEW YORK, N.Y. 10021
Tel: (212) 794 2295 Fax; (212) 249 0533
E-mail: delecam@delccam.us / Cameroon.inission@vahoo.CQm Website: www.delecam.us

 Mr. President,  Heads of State and Government,
 The Secretary-General of the United Nations Organization,
 Heads of Delegation,
I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your election as Chair of this session of the United Nations General Assembly. I do believe you will be served by your rich experience in successfully steering our proceedings. You can count
on the full cooperation of my delegation.
My congratulations also go to Ambassador Peter THOMSON, your predecessor and the architect of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda,
on his commendable record.
Lastly, I would like, once more, to congratulate Mr. Antonio GUTERRES on his unanimous election as Secretary-General of our
Organization.
Mr. Secretary-General, please rest assured of Cameroon's constant support in the performance of your lofty and delicate duties.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
This session is being held within a global context marked by
multiple hotbeds of tension worldwide, where terrorism continues to affect thousands of people, where human activity is causing climate disruptions, and where poverty is far from declining. However, it is also taking place in parallel
with laudable efforts towards implementing the Sustainable Development
Agenda designed to ensure Humanity's fulfilment so that no one is left behind.
Hence the full pertinence of the general debate under the theme, (I quote) Focusing on People: Striving for Peace and a Decent Life for All on a
Sustainable Planet".
Our debates and, especially, our conclusions, will constitute a litmus test of our commitment to the Ideal of the peoples of the United Nations who, in the preamble to the Charter, state their resolve to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, and to promote social progress and
better standards of life for all peoples.
 Mr. President,
For Cameroon and most of our States, peace is the sine qua non for the survival of humanity and for sustainable development. Such peace remains dangerously under threat, notably from terrorism, conflicts, poverty and climate disruptions. Today, I would say, we are all "beggars for peace". And such persistent threats are of utmost concern to us all.

Mr. President,
Today, no continent, no country Is spared by the scourge of terrorism, the atrocities of which unfortunately have become part and parcel of daily life. Let me mention a few examples:
- August 2017, attacks in Barcelona and Ouagadougou; - July 2016, bombing of Baghdad: 292 dead; - October 2015, crash of a Russian Airbus in the Sinai: 224 dead; - March 2015, attack of mosques in Sana'a: 142 dead; - November 2015, attacks in Paris and Saint Denis: 130 dead, ...
Maiduguri, Kolofata, Fotokol ..., conjure up nothing but nameless,
faceless bodies... The number of victims of the Boko-Haram terrorist sect in the Lake Chad basin is estimated at 2000. Cameroon and other neighbouring countries are confronted with the sect and its constantly changing methods
and tactics. We appreciate the support from our partners in this struggle
against barbarism.
The fight against this jihadist sect, Boko-Haram, requires more widespread mobilization if we must stamp out its threat. It is killing our
peoples, our communities, our independence and our democracy. It spells death for peace. In this regard, we look forward to the arrival in the Lake Chad region of the high-level mission the Security Council mandated the UN
Secretary-General to field under resolution 2349.
 Mr. President,
We condemn continuing conflicts in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Middle East, which are wreaking pain and hardship ... so many dead ... so many refugees and displaced persons ... so many children roaming about without a roof over their heads and facing an uncertain or even shattered
future...
Cameroon, which has hosted and continues to host thousands of refugees from the Central African Republic and Nigeria, understands how much they feel hurt, victihriized and threatened in their very existence.
Therefore, let us mobilize and, through our policies, behaviours and
actions, re-focus on people.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Peace is under threat not only from terrorism and conflicts, but also
from persisting poverty. The Security Council has most appropriately reiterated

that poverty is a serious threat. How then can one understand that we have
difficulty tackling it accordingly?
The numerous declarations and resolutions, the various United
Nations development decades, as well as the plans of action and other agendas adopted by the United Nations are not fully effective. The result is clear: poverty persists and the gap between rich and poor countries is ever widening. This situation is exacerbated by the decline in commodity prices.
Mr. President, let us all mobilize In a powerful surge of solidarity to roll back poverty. Let us match our actions with our words. In so doing, we will be providing conditions for a decent life to our people...; let us thus focus on People!
 Mr. President,
We must, for present and future generations, save our planet. We therefore welcome the Paris Climate Agreement, which Cameroon, I recall, was among the first countries to sign and ratify. We are pleased that steps are being taken to Implement it effectively.
I would like to take this opportunity to strongly reiterate the legitimate and unanimous wish of developing countries. As we all know, these countries pollute less, and should thus receive from rich countries, which pollute more, multifarious wherewithal to effectively promote the goals of the Paris Agreement at their level.
For Africa, there are two major challenges.
Firstly, ongoing forest degradation in Central Africa. Let us save the Congo Basin, the earth's second lung.
Secondly, the desertification affecting Lake Chad, which is disappearing. This vast body of water, which is essential for the survival of communities and biodiversity, has already lost 90% of its initial surface. Let us
save Lake Chad!
By so doing, we will be contributing towards preserving the planet for the greater good of humanity.
 Mr. President,

The quest for peace concerns us all. All countries must pool forces
to achieve peace.
Therefore, is it not yet time for the voice of poor countries, especially those of Africa, to be heard?
Is it not time, or rather high time, Africa's message to the World were better
taken into account?
Is it not high time we restructured our Organization to give more weight to Africa's voice within a revitalized General Assembly, a Security Council that is more receptive and equitable to us?
A world characterized by greater solidarity is the sine qua non for peace on earth.
 Mr. President,
Let me now conclude. Peace is our most precious asset. Without
peace, we cannot take any sustainable and effective initiative in the interest of
our youth and our peoples.
The theme of the debate aptly reminds us of the commitment of the founding fathers of the United Nations, namely to:
- save succeeding generations from the scourge of war; and - guarantee a decent life for all, free from want, through cooperation.
This debate urges us to renew our faith in the ideals and purposes
of the United Nations.
Let us together take up the great challenge of world peace and
development.
Once again Cameroon, as it did from this very rostrum on 10 September 2000, urges the world to rally together in one great coalition for humanity placed back at the centre of our policies. For its sake, let us secure peace and a decent life on a sustainable planet.
Thank you, Mr. President.

